
You Never Can Tell

by [George] Bernard Shaw




Act I

In a dentist's operating room on a fine August morning in 1896.  Not
the usual tiny London den, but the best sitting room of a furnished
lodging in a terrace on the sea front at a fashionable watering place.
The operating chair, with a gas pump and cylinder beside it, is half way
between the centre of the room and one of the corners.  If you look into
the room through the window which lights it, you will see the fireplace
in the middle of the wall opposite you, with the door beside it to your
left; an M.R.C.S. diploma in a frame hung on the chimneypiece; an easy
chair covered in black leather on the hearth; a neat stool and bench,
with vice, tools, and a mortar and pestle in the corner to the right.
Near this bench stands a slender machine like a whip provided with a
stand, a pedal, and an exaggerated winch. Recognising this as a dental
drill, you shudder and look away to your left, where you can see another
window, underneath which stands a writing table, with a blotter and a
diary on it, and a chair. Next the writing table, towards the door, is a
leather covered sofa. The opposite wall, close on your right, is
occupied mostly by a bookcase. The operating chair is under your nose,
facing you, with the cabinet of instruments handy to it on your left.
You observe that the professional furniture and apparatus are new, and
that the wall paper, designed, with the taste of an undertaker, in
festoons and urns, the carpet with its symmetrical plans of rich,
cabbagy nosegays, the glass gasalier with lustres; the ornamental gilt
rimmed blue candlesticks on the ends of the mantelshelf, also glass-
draped with lustres, and the ormolu clock under a glass-cover in the
middle between them, its uselessness emphasized by a cheap American
clock disrespectfully placed beside it and now indicating 12 o'clock
noon, all combine with the black marble which gives the fireplace the
air of a miniature family vault, to suggest early Victorian commercial
respectability, belief in money, Bible fetichism, fear of hell always at
war with fear of poverty, instinctive horror of the passionate character
of art, love and Roman Catholic religion, and all the first fruits of
plutocracy in the early generations of the industrial revolution.

There is no shadow of this on the two persons who are occupying the
room just now.  One of them, a very pretty woman in miniature, her tiny
figure dressed with the daintiest gaiety, is of a later generation,
being hardly eighteen yet.  This darling little creature clearly does
not belong to the room, or even to the country; for her complexion,
though very delicate, has been burnt biscuit color by some warmer sun
than England's; and yet there is, for a very subtle observer, a link
between them.  For she has a glass of water in her hand, and a rapidly
clearing cloud of Spartan obstinacy on her tiny firm set mouth and
quaintly squared eyebrows. If the least line of conscience could be
traced between those eyebrows, an Evangelical might cherish some faint
hope of finding her a sheep in wolf's clothing - for her frock is
recklessly pretty - but as the cloud vanishes it leaves her frontal
sinus as smoothly free from conviction of sin as a kitten's.

The dentist, contemplating her with the self-satisfaction of a
successful operator, is a young man of thirty or thereabouts. He does
not give the impression of being much of a workman: his professional
manner evidently strikes him as being a joke, and is underlain by a
thoughtless pleasantry which betrays the young gentleman still unsettled
and in search of amusing adventures, behind the newly set-up dentist in
search of patients. He is not without gravity of demeanor; but the
strained nostrils stamp it as the gravity of the humorist. His eyes are
clear, alert, of sceptically moderate size, and yet a little rash; his
forehead is an excellent one, with plenty of room behind it; his nose
and chin cavalierly handsome. On the whole, an attractive, noticeable
beginner, of whose prospects a man of business might form a tolerably
favorable estimate.

THE YOUNG LADY (handing him the glass). Thank you. (In spite of the
biscuit complexion she has not the slightest foreign accent.)

THE DENTIST (putting it down on the ledge of his cabinet of
instruments). That was my first tooth.

THE YOUNG LADY (aghast). Your first! Do you mean to say that you
began practising on me?

THE DENTIST.  Every dentist has to begin on somebody.

THE YOUNG LADY.  Yes: somebody in a hospital, not people who pay.

THE DENTIST (laughing).  Oh, the hospital doesn't count. I only meant
my first tooth in private practice.  Why didn't you let me give you gas?

THE YOUNG LADY.  Because you said it would be five shillings extra.

THE DENTIST (shocked).  Oh, don't say that.  It makes me feel as if I
had hurt you for the sake of five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (with cool insolence).  Well, so you have! (She gets
up.) Why shouldn't you? it's your business to hurt people. (It amuses
him to be treated in this fashion: he chuckles secretly as he proceeds
to clean and replace his instruments.  She shakes her dress into order;
looks inquisitively about her; and goes to the window.) You have a good
view of the sea from these rooms!  Are they expensive?

THE DENTIST.  Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY.  You don't own the whole house, do you?

THE DENTIST.  No.

THE YOUNG LADY (taking the chair which stands at the writing-table
and looking critically at it as she spins it round on one leg.)  Your
furniture isn't quite the latest thing, is it?

THE DENTIST.  It's my landlord's.

THE YOUNG LADY.  Does he own that nice comfortable Bath chair?
(pointing to the operating chair.)

THE DENTIST.  No: I have that on the hire-purchase system.

THE YOUNG LADY (disparagingly).  I thought so. (Looking about her
again in search of further conclusions.) I suppose you haven't been here
long?

THE DENTIST.  Six weeks.  Is there anything else you would like to
know?

THE YOUNG LADY (the hint quite lost on her).  Any family?

THE DENTIST.  I am not married.

THE YOUNG LADY.  Of course not: anybody can see that.  I meant
sisters and mother and that sort of thing.

THE DENTIST.  Not on the premises.

THE YOUNG LADY.  Hm!  If you've been here six weeks, and mine was
your first tooth, the practice can't be very large, can it?

THE DENTIST.  Not as yet. (He shuts the cabinet, having tidied up
everything.)

THE YOUNG LADY.  Well, good luck! (She takes our her purse.) Five
shillings, you said it would be?

THE DENTIST.  Five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (producing a crown piece).  Do you charge five
shillings for everything?

THE DENTIST.  Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY.  Why?

THE DENTIST.  It's my system. I'm what's called a five shilling
dentist.

THE YOUNG LADY.  How nice! Well, here! (holding up the crown piece) a
nice new five shilling piece! your first fee!  Make a hole in it with
the thing you drill people's teeth with and wear it on your watch-chain.

THE DENTIST.  Thank you.

THE PARLOR MAID (appearing at the door).  The young lady's brother,
sir.

A handsome man in miniature, obviously the young lady's twin, comes
in eagerly. He wears a suit of terra-cotta cashmere, the elegantly cut
frock coat lined in brown silk, and carries in his hand a brown tall hat
and tan gloves to match. He has his sister's delicate biscuit
complexion, and is built on the same small scale; but he is elastic and
strong in muscle, decisive in movement, unexpectedly deeptoned and
trenchant in speech, and with perfect manners and a finished personal
style which might be envied by a man twice his age. Suavity and self-
possession are points of honor with him; and though this, rightly
considered, is only the modern mode of boyish self-consciousness, its
effect is none the less staggering to his elders, and would be
insufferable in a less prepossessing youth. He is promptitude itself,
and has a question ready the moment he enters.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN.  Am I on time?

THE YOUNG LADY.  No: it's all over.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN.  Did you howl?

THE YOUNG LADY.  Oh, something awful.  Mr. Valentine: this is my
brother Phil.  Phil: this is Mr. Valentine, our new dentist.  (Valentine
and Phil bow to one another.  She proceeds, all in one breath.)  He's
only been here six weeks; and he's a bachelor.  The house isn't his; and
the furniture is the landlord's; but the professional plant is hired.
He got my tooth out beautifully at the first go; and he and I are great
friends.

PHILIP.  Been asking a lot of questions?

THE YOUNG LADY (as if incapable of doing such a thing).  Oh, no.

PHILIP.  Glad to hear it.  (To Valentine.)  So good of you not to
mind us, Mr. Valentine.  The fact is, we've never been in England
before; and our mother tells us that the people here simply won't stand
us.  Come and lunch with us.  (Valentine, bewildered by the leaps and
bounds with which their acquaintanceship is proceeding, gasps; but he
has no opportunity of speaking, as the conversation of the twins is
swift and continuous.)

THE YOUNG LADY.  Oh, do, Mr. Valentine.

PHILIP.  At the Marine Hotel - half past one.

THE YOUNG LADY.  We shall be able to tell mamma that a respectable
Englishman has promised to lunch with us.

PHILIP.  Say no more, Mr. Valentine: you'll come.

VALENTINE.  Say no more!  I haven't said anything.  May I ask whom I
have the pleasure of entertaining?  It's really quite impossible for me
to lunch at the Marine Hotel with two perfect strangers.

THE YOUNG LADY (flippantly).  Ooooh! what bosh!  One patient in six
weeks!  What difference does it make to you?

PHILIP (maturely).  No, Dolly: my knowledge of human nature confirms
Mr. Valentine's judgment.  He is right.  Let me introduce Miss Dorothy
Clandon, commonly called Dolly.  (Valentine bows to Dolly.  She nods to
him.)  I'm Philip Clandon.  We're from Madeira, but perfectly
respectable, so far.

VALENTINE.  Clandon!  Are you related to ---

DOLLY (unexpectedly crying out in despair).  Yes, we are.

VALENTINE (astonished).  I beg your pardon?

DOLLY.  Oh, we are, we are.  It's all over, Phil: they know all about
us in England.  (To Valentine.)  Oh, you can't think how maddening it is
to be related to a celebrated person, and never be valued anywhere for
our own sakes.

VALENTINE.  But excuse me: the gentleman I was thinking of is not
celebrated.

DOLLY (staring at him).  Gentleman!  (Phil is also puzzled.)

VALENTINE.  Yes.  I was going to ask whether you were by any chance a
daughter of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall.

DOLLY (vacantly).  No.

PHILIP.  Well come, Dolly: how do you know you're not?

DOLLY (cheered).  Oh, I forgot.  Of course.  Perhaps I am.

VALENTINE.  Don't you know?

PHILIP.  Not in the least.

DOLLY.  It's a wise child ---

PHILIP (cutting her short).  Sh!  (Valentine starts nervously; for
the sound made by Philip, though but momentary, is like cutting a sheet
of silk in two with a flash of lightning.  It is the result of long
practice in checking Dolly's indiscretions.)  The fact is, Mr.
Valentine, we are the children of the celebrated Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon,
an authoress of great repute - in Madeira.  No household is complete
without her works.  We came to England to get away from them.  The are
called the Twentieth Century Treatises.

DOLLY.   Twentieth Century Cooking.

PHILIP.  Twentieth Century Creeds.

DOLLY.   Twentieth Century Clothing.

PHILIP.  Twentieth Century Conduct.

DOLLY.   Twentieth Century Children.

PHILIP.  Twentieth Century Parents.

DOLLY.   Cloth limp, half a dollar.

PHILIP.  Or mounted on linen for hard family use, two dollars.  No
family should be without them.  Read them, Mr. Valentine: they'll
improve your mind.

DOLLY.  But not till we've gone, please.

PHILIP.  Quite so: we prefer people with unimproved minds.  Our own
minds are in that fresh and unspoiled condition.

VALENTINE (dubiously).  Hm!

DOLLY (echoing him inquiringly).  Hm?  Phil: he prefers people whose
minds are improved.

PHILIP.  In that case we shall have to introduce him to the other
member of the family: the Woman of the Twentieth Century; our sister
Gloria!

DOLLY (dithyrambically).  Nature's masterpiece!

PHILIP.  Learning's daughter!

DOLLY.  Madeira's pride!

PHILIP.  Beauty's paragon!

DOLLY (suddenly descending to prose). Bosh!  No complexion.

VALENTINE (desperately).  May I have a word?

PHILIP (politely).  Excuse us.  Go ahead.

DOLLY (very nicely).  So sorry.

VALENTINE (attempting to take them paternally).  I really must give a
hint to you young people---

DOLLY (breaking out again).  Oh, come: I like that.  How old are you?

PHILIP.  Over thirty.

DOLLY.  He's not.

PHILIP (confidently).  He is.

DOLLY (emphatically).  Twenty-seven.

PHILIP (imperturbably).  Thirty-three.

DOLLY.  Stuff!

PHILIP (to Valentine).  I appeal to you, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (remonstrating).  Well, really---(resigning himself.)
Thirty-one.

PHILIP (to Dolly).  You were wrong.

DOLLY.  So were you.

PHILIP (suddenly conscientious).  We're forgetting our manners,
Dolly.

DOLLY (remorseful).  Yes, so we are.

PHILIP (apologetic).  We interrupted you, Mr. Valentine.

DOLLY.  You were going to improve our minds, I think.

VALENTINE.  The fact is, your---

PHILIP (anticipating him).  Our appearance?

DOLLY.  Our manners?

VALENTINE (ad misericordiam).  Oh, do let me speak.

DOLLY.  The old story.  We talk too much.

PHILIP.  We do.  Shut up, both.  (He seats himself on the arm of the
opposing chair.)

DOLLY.  Mum!  (She sits down in the writing-table chair, and closes
her lips tight with the tips of her fingers.)

VALENTINE.  Thank you.  (He brings the stool from the bench in the
corner; places it between them; and sits down with a judicial air.  They
attend to him with extreme gravity.  He addresses himself first to
Dolly.)  Now may I ask, to begin with, have you ever been in an English
seaside resort before?  (She shakes her head slowly and solemnly.  He
turns to Phil, who shakes his head quickly and expressively.)  I thought
so.  Well, Mr. Clandon, our acquaintance has been short; but it has been
voluble; and I have gathered enough to convince me that you are neither
of you capable of conceiving what life in an English seaside resort is.
Believe me, it's not a question of manners and appearance.  In those
respects we enjoy a freedom unknown in Madeira.  (Dolly shakes her head
vehemently.)  Oh, yes, I assure you.  Lord de Cresci's sister bicycles
in knickerbockers; and the rector's wife advocates dress reform and
wears hygienic boots.  (Dolly furtively looks at her own shoe: Valentine
catches her in the act, and deftly adds)  No, that's not the sort of
boot I mean. (Dolly's shoe vanishes.)  We don't bother much about dress
and manners in England, because, as a nation we don't dress well and
we've no manners.  But - and now will you excuse my frankness?  (They
nod.)  Thank you.  Well, in a seaside resort there's one thing you must
have before anybody can afford to be seen going about with you; and
that's a father, alive or dead.  (He looks at them alternately, with
emphasis.  They meet his gaze like martyrs.)  Am I to infer that you
have omitted that indispensable part of your social equipment?  (They
confirm him by melancholy nods.)  Them I'm sorry to say that if you are
going to stay here for any length of time, it will be impossible for me
to accept your kind invitation to lunch.  (He rises with an air of
finality, and replaces the stool by the bench.)

PHILIP (rising with grave politeness).  Come, Dolly.  (He gives her
his arm.)

DOLLY.  Good morning.  (They go together to the door with perfect
dignity.)

VALENTINE (overwhelmed with remorse).  Oh, stop, stop.  (They halt
and turn, arm in arm.)  You make me feel a perfect beast.

DOLLY.  That's your conscience: not us.

VALENTINE (energetically, throwing off all pretence of a professional
manner).  My conscience!  My conscience has been my ruin.  Listen to me.
Twice before I have set up as a respectable medical practitioner in
various parts of England.  On both occasions I acted conscientiously,
and told my patients the brute truth instead of what they wanted to be
told.  Result, ruin.  Now I've set up as a dentist, a five shilling
dentist; and I've done with conscience forever.  This is my last chance.
I spent my last sovereign on moving in; and I haven't paid a shilling of
rent yet.  I'm eating and drinking on credit; my landlord is as rich as
a Jew and as hard as nails; and I've made five shillings in six weeks.
If I swerve by a hair's breadth from the straight line of the most rigid
respectability, I'm done for.  Under such a circumstance, is it fair to
ask me to lunch with you when you don't know your own father?

DOLLY.  After all, our grandfather is a canon of Lincoln Cathedral.

VALENTINE (like a castaway mariner who sees a sail on the horizon).
What!  Have you a grandfather?

DOLLY.  Only one.

VALENTINE.  My dear, good young friends, why on earth didn't you tell
me that before?  A cannon of Lincoln!  That makes it all right, of
course.  Just excuse me while I change my coat.  (He reaches the door in
a bound and vanishes.  Dolly and Phil stare after him, and then stare at
one another.  Missing their audience, they droop and become commonplace
at once.)

PHILIP (throwing away Dolly's arm and coming ill-humoredly towards
the operating chair).  That wretched bankrupt ivory snatcher makes a
compliment of allowing us to stand him a lunch - probably the first
square meal he has had for months.  (He gives the chair a kick, as if it
were Valentine.)

DOLLY.  It's too beastly.  I won't stand it any longer, Phil.  Here
in England everybody asks whether you have a father the very first
thing.

PHILIP.  I won't stand it either.  Mamma must tell us who he was.

DOLLY.  Or who he is.  He may be alive.

PHILIP.  I hope not.  No man alive shall father me.

DOLLY.  He might have a lot of money, though.

PHILIP.  I doubt it.  My knowledge of human nature leads me to
believe that if he had a lot of money he wouldn't have got rid of his
affectionate family so easily.  Anyhow, let's look at the bright side of
things.  Depend on it, he's dead.  (He goes to the hearth and stands
with his back to the fireplace, spreading himself.  The parlor maid
appears.  The twins, under observation, instantly shine out again with
their former brilliancy.)

THE PARLOR MAID.  Two ladies for you, miss.  Your mother and sister,
miss, I think.

Mrs. Clandon and Gloria come in.  Mrs. Clandon is between forty and
fifty, with a slight tendency to soft, sedentary fat, and a fair
remainder of good looks, none the worse preserved because she has
evidently followed the old tribal matronly fashion of making no
pretension in that direction after her marriage, and might almost be
suspected of wearing a cap at home.  She carries herself artificially
well, as women were taught to do as a part of good manners by dancing
masters and reclining boards before these were superseded by the modern
artistic cult of beauty and health.  Her hair, a flaxen hazel fading
into white, is crimped, and parted in the middle with the ends plaited
and made into a knot, from which observant people of a certain age infer
that Mrs. Clandon had sufficient individuality and good taste to stand
out resolutely against the now forgotten chignon in her girlhood.  In
short, she is distinctly old fashioned for her age in dress and manners.
But she belongs to the forefront of her own period (say 1860-80) in a
jealously assertive attitude of character and intellect, and in being a
woman of cultivated interests rather than passionately developed
personal affections.  Her voice and ways are entirely kindly and humane;
and she lends herself conscientiously to the occasional demonstrations
of fondness by which her children mark their esteem for her; but
displays of personal sentiment secretly embarrass her: passion in her is
humanitarian rather than human: she feels strongly about social
questions and principles, not about persons.  Only, one observes that
this reasonableness and intense personal privacy, which leaves her
relations with Gloria and Phil much as they might be between her and the
children of any other woman, breaks down in the case of Dolly.  Though
almost every word she addresses to her is necessarily in the nature of a
remonstrance for some breach of decorum, the tenderness in her voice is
unmistakable; and it is not surprising that years of such remonstrance
have left Dolly hopelessly spoiled.

Gloria, who is hardly past twenty, is a much more formidable person
than her mother.  She is the incarnation of haughty highmindedness,
raging with the impatience of an impetuous, dominative character
paralyzed by the impotence of her youth, and unwillingly disciplined by
the constant danger of ridicule from her lighter-handed juniors.  Unlike
her mother, she is all passion; and the conflict of her passion with her
obstinate pride and intense fastidiousness results in a freezing
coldness of manner.  In an ugly woman all this would be repulsive; but
Gloria is an attractive woman.  Her deep chestnut hair, olive brown
skin, long eyelashes, shaded grey eyes that often flash like stars,
delicately turned full lips, and compact and supple, but muscularly
plump figure appeal with disdainful frankness to the senses and
imagination.  A very dangerous girl, one would say, if the moral
passions were not also marked, and even nobly marked, in a fine brow.
Her tailor-made skirt-and-jacket dress of saffron brown cloth, seems
conventional when her back is turned; but it displays in front a blouse
of sea-green silk which upsets its conventionality with one stroke, and
sets her apart as effectually as the twins from the ordinary run of
fashionable seaside humanity.

Mrs. Clandon comes a little way into the room, looking round to see
who is present.  Gloria, who studiously avoids encouraging the twins by
betraying any interest in them, wanders to the window and looks out with
her thoughts far away.  The parlor maid, instead of withdrawing, shuts
the door and waits at it.

MRS. CLANDON.  Well, children? How is the toothache, Dolly?

DOLLY.  Cured, thank Heaven.  I've had it out.  (She sits down on the
step of the operating chair.  Mrs. Clandon takes the writing-table
chair.)

PHILIP (striking in gravely from the hearth).  And the dentist, a
first-rate professional man of the highest standing, is coming to lunch
with us.

MRS. CLANDON (looking round apprehensively at the servant).  Phil!

THE PARLOR MAID.  Beg pardon, ma'am.  I'm waiting for Mr. Valentine.
I have a message for him.

DOLLY.  Who from?

MRS. CLANDON (shocked).  Dolly!  (Dolly catches her lips with her
finger tips, suppressing a little splutter of mirth.)

THE PARLOR MAID.  Only the landlord, ma'am.

Valentine, in a blue serge suit, with a straw hat in his hand, comes
back in high spirits, out of breath with the haste he has made.  Gloria
turns from the window and studies him with freezing attention.

PHILIP.  Let me introduce you, Mr. Valentine.  My mother, Mrs.
Lanfrey Clandon.  (Mrs. Clandon bows.  Valentine bows, self-possessed
and quite equal to the occasion.)  My sister Gloria.  (Gloria bows with
cold dignity and sits down on the sofa.  Valentine falls in love at
first sight and is miserably confused.  He fingers his hat nervously,
and makes her a sneaking bow.)

MRS. CLANDON.  I understand that we are to have the pleasure of
seeing you at luncheon to-day, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE.  Thank you--er--if you don't mind--I mean if you will be
so kind -- (to the parlor maid testily)  What is it?

THE PARLOR MAID.  The landlord, sir, wishes to speak to you before
you go out.

VALENTINE.  Oh, tell him I have four patients here.  (The Clandons
look surprised, except Phil, who is imperturbable.)  If he wouldn't mind
waiting just two minutes, I--I'll slip down and see him for a moment.
(Throwing himself confidentially on her sense of the position.)  Say I'm
busy, but that I want to see him.

THE PARLOR MAID (reassuringly).  Yes, sir.  (She goes.)

MRS. CLANDON (on the point of rising).  We are detaining you, I am
afraid.

VALENTINE.  Not at all, not at all.  Your presence here will be the
greatest help to me.  The fact is, I owe six week's rent; and I've had
no patients until to-day.  My interview with my landlord will be
considerably smoothed by the apparent boom in my business.

DOLLY (vexed).  Oh, how tiresome of you to let it all out!  And we've
just been pretending that you were a respectable professional man in a
first-rate position.

MRS. CLANDON (horrified).  Oh, Dolly, Dolly!  My dearest, how can you
be so rude?  (To Valentine.)  Will you excuse these barbarian children
of mine, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE.  Thank you, I'm used to them.  Would it be too much to ask
you to wait five minutes while I get rid of my landlord downstairs?

DOLLY.  Don't be long.  We're hungry.

MRS. CLANDON (again remonstrating).  Dolly, dear!

VALENTINE (to Dolly).  All right.  (To Mrs. Clandon.)  Thank you: I
shan't be long.  (He steals a look at Gloria as he turns to go.  She is
looking gravely at him.  He falls into confusion.)  I--er--er--yes--
thank you (he succeeds at last in blundering himself out of the room;
but the exhibition is a pitiful one).

PHILIP.  Did you observe?  (Pointing to Gloria.)  Love at first
sight.  You can add his scalp to your collection, Gloria.

MRS. CLANDON.  Sh--sh, pray, Phil.  He may have heard you.

PHILIP.  Not he.  (Bracing himself for a scene.)  And now look here,
mamma.  (He takes the stool from the bench; and seats himself
majestically in the middle of the room, taking a leaf out of Valentine's
book.  Dolly, feeling that her position on the step of the operating
chair is unworthy of the dignity of the occasion, rises, looking
important and determined; crosses to the window; and stands with her
back to the end of the writing-table, her hands behind her and on the
table.  Mrs. Clandon looks at them, wondering what is coming.  Gloria
becomes attentive.  Philip straightens his back; places his knuckles
symmetrically on his knees; and opens his case.)  Dolly and I have been
talking over things a good deal lately; and I don't think, judging from
my knowledge of human nature--we don't think that you (speaking very
staccato, with the words detached) quite appreciate the fact ---

DOLLY (seating herself on the end of the table with a spring).  That
we've grown up.

MRS. CLANDON.  Indeed?  In what way have I given you any reason to
complain?

PHILIP.  Well, there are certain matters upon which we are beginning
to feel that you might take us a little more into your confidence.

MRS. CLANDON (rising, with all the placidity of her age suddenly
broken up; and a curious hard excitement, dignified but dogged, ladylike
but implacable--the manner of the Old Guard of the Women's Rights
movement--coming upon her).  Phil: take care.  Remember what I have
always taught you.  There are two sorts of family life, Phil; and your
experience of human nature only extends, so far, to one of them.
(Rhetorically.)  The sort you know is based on mutual respect, on
recognition of the right of every member of the household to
independence and privacy (her emphasis on "privacy" is intense) in their
personal concerns.  And because you have always enjoyed that, it seems
such a matter of course to you that you don't value it.  But (with
biting acrimony) there is another sort of family life: a life in which
husbands open their wives' letters, and call on them to account for
every farthing of their expenditure and every moment of their time; in
which women do the same to their children; in which no room is private
and no hour sacred; in which duty, obedience, affection, home, morality
and religion are detestable tyrannies, and life is a vulgar round of
punishments and lies, coercion and rebellion, jealousy, suspicion,
recrimination--Oh!  I cannot describe it to you: fortunately for you,
you know nothing about it.  (She sits down, panting.  Gloria has
listened to her with flashing eyes, sharing all her indignation.)

DOLLY (inaccessible to rhetoric).  See Twentieth Century Parents,
chapter on Liberty, passim.

MRS. CLANDON (touching her shoulder affectionately, soothed even by a
gibe from her).  My dear Dolly: if you only knew how glad I am that it
is nothing but a joke to you, though it is such bitter earnest to me.
(More resolutely, turning to Philip.)  Phil, I never ask you questions
about your private concerns.  You are not going to question me, are you?

PHILIP.  I think it due to ourselves to say that the question we
wanted to ask is as much our business as yours.

DOLLY.  Besides, it can't be good to keep a lot of questions bottled
up inside you.  You did it, mamma; but see how awfully it's broken out
again in me.

MRS. CLANDON.  I see you want to ask your question.  Ask it.

DOLLY AND PHILIP (beginning simultaneously).  Who--- (They stop.)

PHILIP.  Now look here, Dolly: am I going to conduct this business or
are you?

DOLLY.  You.

PHILIP.  Then hold your mouth.  (Dolly does so literally.)  The
question is a simple one.  When the ivory snatcher---

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Phil!

PHILIP.  Dentist is an ugly word.  The man of ivory and gold asked us
whether we were the children of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall.
In pursuance of the precepts in your treatise on Twentieth Century
Conduct, and your repeated personal exhortations to us to curtail the
number of unnecessary lies we tell, we replied truthfully the we didn't
know.

DOLLY.  Neither did we.

PHILIP.  Sh!  The result was that the gum architect made considerable
difficulties about accepting our invitation to lunch, although I doubt
if he has had anything but tea and bread and butter for a fortnight
past.  Now my knowledge of human nature leads me to believe that we had
a father, and that you probably know who he was.

MRS. CLANDON (her agitation returning).  Stop, Phil.  Your father is
nothing to you, nor to me (vehemently).  That is enough.  (The twins are
silenced, but not satisfied.  Their faces fall.  But Gloria, who has
been following the altercation attentively, suddenly intervenes.)

GLORIA (advancing).  Mother: we have a right to know.

MRS. CLANDON (rising and facing her).  Gloria!  "We!"  Who is "we"?

GLORIA (steadfastly).  We three.  (Her tone is unmistakable: she is
pitting her strength against her mother for the first time.  The twins
instantly go over to the enemy.)

MRS. CLANDON (wounded).  In your mouth "we" used to mean you and I,
Gloria.

PHILIP (rising decisively and putting away the stool).  We're hurting
you: let's drop it.  We didn't think you'd mind.  I don't want to know.

DOLLY (coming off the table).  I'm sure I don't.  Oh, don't look like
that, mamma.  (She looks angrily at Gloria.)

MRS. CLANDON (touching her eyes hastily with her handkerchief and
sitting down again).  Thank you, my dear.  Thanks, Phil.

GLORIA (inexorably).  We have a right to know, mother.

MRS. CLANDON (indignantly).  Ah!  You insist.

GLORIA.  Do you intend that we shall never know?

DOLLY.  Oh, Gloria, don't.  It's barbarous.

GLORIA (with quiet scorn).  What is the use of being weak?  You see
what has happened with this gentleman here, mother.  The same thing has
happened to me.

MRS. CLANDON } (all       { What do you mean?

DOLLY        } together). { Oh, tell us.

PHILIP       }            { What happened to you?

GLORIA.  Oh, nothing of any consequence.  (She turns away from them
and goes up to the easy chair at the fireplace, where she sits down,
almost with her back to them.  As they wait expectantly, she adds, over
her shoulder, with studied indifference.)  On board the steamer the
first officer did me the honor to propose to me.

DOLLY.  No, it was to me.

MRS. CLANDON.  The first officer!  Are you serious, Gloria?  What did
you say to him?  (correcting herself)  Excuse me: I have no right to ask
that.

GLORIA.  The answer is pretty obvious.  A woman who does not know who
her father was cannot accept such an offer.

MRS. CLANDON.  Surely you did not want to accept it?

GLORIA (turning a little and raising her voice).  No; but suppose I
had wanted to!

PHILIP.  Did that difficulty strike you, Dolly?

DOLLY.  No, I accepted him.

GLORIA       } (all crying   { Accepted him!

MRS. CLANDON }  out          { Dolly!

PHILIP       }  together)    { Oh, I say!

DOLLY (naively).  He did look such a fool!

MRS. CLANDON.  But why did you do such a thing, Dolly?

DOLLY.  For fun, I suppose.  He had to measure my finger for a ring.
You'd have done the same thing yourself.

MRS. CLANDON.  No, Dolly, I would not.  As a matter of fact the first
officer did propose to me; and I told him to keep that sort of thing for
women were young enough to be amused by it.  He appears to have acted on
my advice.  (She rises and goes to the hearth.)  Gloria: I am sorry you
think me weak; but I cannot tell you what you want.  You are all too
young.

PHILIP.  This is rather a startling departure from Twentieth Century
principles.

DOLLY (quoting).  "Answer all your children's questions, and answer
them truthfully, as soon as they are old enough to ask them."  See
Twentieth Century Motherhood---

PHILIP.  Page one---

DOLLY.   Chapter one---

PHILIP.  Sentence one.

MRS. CLANDON.  My dears: I did not say that you were too young to
know.  I said you were too young to be taken into my confidence.  You
are very bright children, all of you; but I am glad for your sakes that
you are still very inexperienced and consequently very unsympathetic.
There are some experiences of mine that I cannot bear to speak of except
to those who have gone through what I have gone through.  I hope you
will never be qualified for such confidences.  But I will take care that
you shall learn all you want to know.  Will that satisfy you?

PHILIP.  Another grievance, Dolly.

DOLLY.  We're not sympathetic.

GLORIA (leaning forward in her chair and looking earnestly up at her
mother).  Mother: I did not mean to be unsympathetic.

MRS. CLANDON (affectionately).  Of course not, dear.  Do you think I
don't understand?

GLORIA (rising).  But, mother---

MRS. CLANDON (drawing back a little).  Yes?

GLORIA (obstinately).  It is nonsense to tell us that our father is
nothing to us.

MRS. CLANDON (provoked to sudden resolution).  Do you remember your
father?

GLORIA (meditatively, as if the recollection were a tender one).  I
am not quite sure.  I think so.

MRS. CLANDON (grimly).  You are not sure?

GLORIA.  No.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet force).  Gloria: if I had ever struck you--
(Gloria recoils: Philip and Dolly are disagreeably shocked; all three
start at her, revolted as she continues)--struck you purposely,
deliberately, with the intention of hurting you, with a whip bought for
the purpose!  Would you remember that, do you think?  (Gloria utters an
exclamation of indignant repulsion.)  That would have been your last
recollection of your father, Gloria, if I had not taken you away from
him.  I have kept him out of your life: keep him now out of mine by
never mentioning him to me again.  (Gloria, with a shudder, covers her
face with her hands, until, hearing someone at the door, she turns away
and pretends to occupy herself looking at the names of the books in the
bookcase.  Mrs. Clandon sits down on the sofa.  Valentine returns.).

VALENTINE.  I hope I've not kept you waiting.  That landlord of mine
is really an extraordinary old character.

DOLLY (eagerly).  Oh, tell us.  How long has he given you to pay?

MRS. CLANDON (distracted by her child's bad manners).  Dolly, Dolly,
Dolly dear!  You must not ask questions.

DOLLY (demurely).  So sorry.  You'll tell us, won't you, Mr.
Valentine?

VALENTINE.  He doesn't want his rent at all.  He's broken his tooth
on a Brazil nut; and he wants me to look at it and to lunch with him
afterwards.

DOLLY.  Then have him up and pull his tooth out at once; and we'll
bring him to lunch, too.  Tell the maid to fetch him along.  (She runs
to the bell and rings it vigorously.  Then, with a sudden doubt she
turns to Valentine and adds)  I suppose he's respectable---really
respectable.

VALENTINE.  Perfectly.  Not like me.

DOLLY.  Honest Injun?  (Mrs. Clandon gasps faintly; but her powers of
remonstrance are exhausted.)

VALENTINE.  Honest Injun!

DOLLY.  Then off with you and bring him up.

VALENTINE (looking dubiously at Mrs. Clandon).  I daresay he'd be
delighted if--er---?

MRS. CLANDON (rising and looking at her watch).  I shall be happy to
see your friend at lunch, if you can persuade him to come; but I can't
wait to see him now: I have an appointment at the hotel at a quarter to
one with an old friend whom I have not seen since I left England
eighteen years ago.  Will you excuse me?

VALENTINE.  Certainly, Mrs. Clandon.

GLORIA.  Shall I come?

MRS. CLANDON.  No, dear.  I want to be alone.  (She goes out,
evidently still a good deal troubled.  Valentine opens the door for her
and follows her out.)

PHILIP (significantly--to Dolly).  Hmhm!

DOLLY (significantly to Philip).  Ahah!  (The parlor maid answers the
bell.)

DOLLY.  Show the old gentleman up.

THE PARLOR MAID (puzzled).  Madam?

DOLLY.  The old gentleman with the toothache.

PHILIP.  The landlord.

THE PARLOR MAID.  Mr. Crampton, Sir?

PHILIP.  Is his name Crampton?

DOLLY (to Philip).  Sounds rheumaticky, doesn't it?

PHILIP.  Chalkstones, probably.

DOLLY (over her shoulder, to the parlor maid).  Show Mr. Crampstones
up.  (Goes R. to writing-table chair).

THE PARLOR MAID (correcting her).  Mr. Crampton, miss.  (She goes.)

DOLLY (repeating it to herself like a lesson).  Crampton, Crampton,
Crampton, Crampton, Crampton.  (She sits down studiously at the writing-
table.)  I must get that name right, or Heaven knows what I shall call
him.

GLORIA.  Phil: can you believe such a horrible thing as that about
our father---what mother said just now?

PHILIP.  Oh, there are lots of people of that kind.  Old Chalice used
to thrash his wife and daughters with a cartwhip.

DOLLY (contemptuously).  Yes, a Portuguese!

PHILIP.  When you come to men who are brutes, there is much in common
between the Portuguese and the English variety, Doll.  Trust my
knowledge of human nature.  (He resumes his position on the hearthrug
with an elderly and responsible air.)

GLORIA (with angered remorse).  I don't think we shall ever play
again at our old game of guessing what our father was to be like.
Dolly: are you sorry for your father---the father with lots of money?

DOLLY.  Oh, come!  What about your father---the lonely old man with
the tender aching heart?  He's pretty well burst up, I think.

PHILIP.  There can be no doubt that the governor is an exploded
superstition.  (Valentine is heard talking to somebody outside the
door.)  But hark: he comes.

GLORIA (nervously).  Who?

DOLLY.  Chalkstones.

PHILIP.  Sh!  Attention.  (They put on their best manners.  Philip
adds in a lower voice to Gloria)  If he's good enough for the lunch,
I'll nod to Dolly; and if she nods to you, invite him straight away.

(Valentine comes back with his landlord.  Mr. Fergus Crampton is a
man of about sixty, tall, hard and stringy, with an atrociously
obstinate, ill tempered, grasping mouth, and a querulously dogmatic
voice.  Withal he is highly nervous and sensitive, judging by his thin
transparent skin marked with multitudinous lines, and his slender
fingers.  His consequent capacity for suffering acutely from all the
dislike that his temper and obstinacy can bring upon him is proved by
his wistful, wounded eyes, by a plaintive note in his voice, a painful
want of confidence in his welcome, and a constant but indifferently
successful effort to correct his natural incivility of manner and
proneness to take offence.  By his keen brows and forehead he is clearly
a shrewd man; and there is no sign of straitened means or commercial
diffidence about him: he is well dressed, and would be classed at a
guess as a prosperous master manufacturer in a business inherited from
an old family in the aristocracy of trade.  His navy blue coat is not of
the usual fashionable pattern.  It is not exactly a pilot's coat; but it
is cut that way, double breasted, and with stout buttons and broad
lappels, a coat for a shipyard rather than a counting house.  He has
taken a fancy to Valentine, who cares nothing for his crossness of grain
and treats him with a sort of disrespectful humanity, for which he is
secretly grateful.)

VALENTINE.  May I introduce---this is Mr. Crampton---Miss Dorothy
Clandon, Mr. Philip Clandon, Miss Clandon.  (Crampton stands nervously
bowing.  They all bow.)  Sit down, Mr. Crampton.

DOLLY (pointing to the operating chair).  That is the most
comfortable chair, Mr. Ch--crampton.

CRAMPTON.  Thank you; but won't this young lady---(indicating Gloria,
who is close to the chair)?

GLORIA.  Thank you, Mr. Crampton: we are just going.

VALENTINE (bustling him across to the chair with good-humored
peremptoriness).  Sit down, sit down.  You're tired.

CRAMPTON.  Well, perhaps as I am considerably the oldest person
present, I--- (He finishes the sentence by sitting down a little
rheumatically in the operating chair.  Meanwhile, Philip, having studied
him critically during his passage across the room, nods to Dolly; and
Dolly nods to Gloria.)

GLORIA.  Mr. Crampton: we understand that we are preventing Mr.
Valentine from lunching with you by taking him away ourselves.  My
mother would be very glad, indeed, if you would come too.

CRAMPTON (gratefully, after looking at her earnestly for a moment).
Thank you.  I will come with pleasure.

GLORIA  } (politely  { Thank you very much--er---

DOLLY   } murmuring).{ So glad--er---

PHILIP  }            { Delighted, I'm sure--er---

(The conversation drops.  Gloria and Dolly look at one another; then
at Valentine and Philip.  Valentine and Philip, unequal to the occasion,
look away from them at one another, and are instantly so disconcerted by
catching one another's eye, that they look back again and catch the eyes
of Gloria and Dolly.  Thus, catching one another all round, they all
look at nothing and are quite at a loss.  Crampton looks about him,
waiting for them to begin.  The silence becomes unbearable.)

DOLLY (suddenly, to keep things going).  How old are you, Mr.
Crampton?

GLORIA (hastily).  I am afraid we must be going, Mr. Valentine.  It
is understood, then, that we meet at half past one.  (She makes for the
door.  Philip goes with her.  Valentine retreats to the bell.)

VALENTINE.  Half past one.  (He rings the bell.)  Many thanks.  (He
follows Gloria and Philip to the door, and goes out with them.)

DOLLY (who has meanwhile stolen across to Crampton).  Make him give
you gas.  It's five shillings extra: but it's worth it.

CRAMPTON (amused).  Very well.  (Looking more earnestly at her.)  So
you want to know my age, do you?  I'm fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with conviction).  You look it.

CRAMPTON (grimly).  I dare say I do.

DOLLY.  What are you looking at me so hard for?  Anything wrong?
(She feels whether her hat is right.)

CRAMPTON.  You're like somebody.

DOLLY.  Who?

CRAMPTON.  Well, you have a curious look of my mother.

DOLLY (incredulously).  Your mother!!!  Quite sure you don't mean
your daughter?

CRAMPTON (suddenly blackening with hate).  Yes: I'm quite sure I
don't mean my daughter.

DOLLY (sympathetically).  Tooth bad?

CRAMPTON.  No, no: nothing.  A twinge of memory, Miss Clandon, not of
toothache.

DOLLY.  Have it out.  "Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow:" with
gas, five shillings extra.

CRAMPTON (vindicatively).  No, not a sorrow.  An injury that was done
me once: that's all.  I don't forget injuries; and I don't want to
forget them.  (His features settle into an implacable frown.)

(re-enter Philip: to look for Dolly.  He comes down behind her
unobserved.)

DOLLY (looking critically at Crampton's expression).  I don't think
we shall like you when you are brooding over your sorrows.

PHILIP (who has entered the room unobserved, and stolen behind her).
My sister means well, Mr. Crampton: but she is indiscreet.  Now Dolly,
outside!  (He takes her towards the door.)

DOLLY (in a perfectly audible undertone).  He says he's only fifty-
seven; and he thinks me the image of his mother; and he hates his
daughter; and--- (She is interrupted by the return of Valentine.)

VALENTINE.  Miss Clandon has gone on.

PHILIP.  Don't forget half past one.

DOLLY.  Mind you leave Mr. Crampton with enough teeth to eat with.
(They go out.  Valentine comes down to his cabinet, and opens it.)

CRAMPTON.  That's a spoiled child, Mr. Valentine.  That's one of your
modern products.  When I was her age, I had many a good hiding fresh in
my memory to teach me manners.

VALENTINE (taking up his dental mirror and probe from the shelf in
front of the cabinet).  What did you think of her sister?

CRAMPTON.  You liked her better, eh?

VALENTINE (rhapsodically).  She struck me as being--- (He checks
himself, and adds, prosaically)  However, that's not business.  (He
places himself behind Crampton's right shoulder and assumes his
professional tone.)  Open, please.  (Crampton opens his mouth.
Valentine puts the mirror in, and examines his teeth.)  Hm!  You have
broken that one.  What a pity to spoil such a splendid set of teeth!
Why do you crack nuts with them?  (He withdraws the mirror, and comes
forward to converse with Crampton.)

CRAMPTON.  I've always cracked nuts with them: what else are they
for?  (Dogmatically.)  The proper way to keep teeth good is to give them
plenty of use on bones and nuts, and wash them every day with soap---
plain yellow soap.

VALENTINE.  Soap!  Why soap?

CRAMPTON.  I began using it as a boy because I was made to; and I've
used it ever since.  And I never had toothache in my life.

VALENTINE.  Don't you find it rather nasty?

CRAMPTON.  I found that most things that were good for me were nasty.
But I was taught to put up with them, and made to put up with them.  I'm
used to it now: in fact, I like the taste when the soap is really good.

VALENTINE (making a wry face in spite of himself).  You seem to have
been very carefully educated, Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON (grimly).  I wasn't spoiled, at all events.

VALENTINE (smiling a little to himself).  Are you quite sure?

CRAMPTON.  What d'y' mean?

VALENTINE.  Well, your teeth are good, I admit.  But I've seen just
as good in very self-indulgent mouths.  (He goes to the ledge of cabinet
and changes the probe for another one.)

CRAMPTON.  It's not the effect on the teeth: it's the effect on the
character.

VALENTINE (placably).  Oh, the character, I see.  (He recommences
operations.)  A little wider, please.  Hm!  That one will have to come
out: it's past saving.  (He withdraws the probe and again comes to the
side of the chair to converse.)  Don't be alarmed: you shan't feel
anything.  I'll give you gas.

CRAMPTON.  Rubbish, man: I want none of your gas.  Out with it.
People were taught to bear necessary pain in my day.

VALENTINE.  Oh, if you like being hurt, all right.  I'll hurt you as
much as you like, without any extra charge for the beneficial effect on
your character.

CRAMPTON (rising and glaring at him).  Young man: you owe me six
weeks' rent.

VALENTINE.  I do.

CRAMPTON.  Can you pay me?

VALENTINE.  No.

CRAMPTON (satisfied with his advantage).  I thought not.  How soon
d'y' think you'll be able to pay me if you have no better manners than
to make game of your patients?  (He sits down again.)

VALENTINE.  My good sir: my patients haven't all formed their
characters on kitchen soap.

CRAMPTON (suddenly gripping him by the arm as he turns away again to
the cabinet).  So much the worse for them.  I tell you you don't
understand my character.  If I could spare all my teeth, I'd make you
pull them all out one after another to shew you what a properly hardened
man can go through with when he's made up his mind to do it.  (He nods
at him to enforce the effect of this declaration, and releases him.)

VALENTINE (his careless pleasantry quite unruffled).  And you want to
be more hardened, do you?

CRAMPTON.  Yes.

VALENTINE (strolling away to the bell).  Well, you're quite hard
enough for me already---as a landlord.  (Crampton receives this with a
growl of grim humor.  Valentine rings the bell, and remarks in a
cheerful, casual way, whilst waiting for it to be answered.)  Why did
you never get married, Mr. Crampton?  A wife and children would have
taken some of the hardness out of you.

CRAMPTON (with unexpected ferocity).  What the devil is that to you?
(The parlor maid appears at the door.)

VALENTINE (politely).  Some warm water, please.  (She retires: and
Valentine comes back to the cabinet, not at all put out by Crampton's
rudeness, and carries on the conversation whilst he selects a forceps
and places it ready to his hand with a gag and a drinking glass.)  You
were asking me what the devil that was to me.  Well, I have an idea of
getting married myself.

CRAMPTON (with grumbling irony).  Naturally, sir, naturally.  When a
young man has come to his last farthing, and is within twenty-four hours
of having his furniture distrained upon by his landlord, he marries.
I've noticed that before.  Well, marry; and be miserable.

VALENTINE.  Oh, come, what do you know about it?

CRAMPTON.  I'm not a bachelor.

VALENTINE.  Then there is a Mrs. Crampton?

CRAMPTON (wincing with a pang of resentment).  Yes---damn her!

VALENTINE (unperturbed).  Hm!  A father, too, perhaps, as well as a
husband, Mr. Crampton?

CRAMPTON.  Three children.

VALENTINE (politely).  Damn them?--eh?

CRAMPTON (jealously).  No, sir: the children are as much mine as
hers.  (The parlor maid brings in a jug of hot water.)

VALENTINE.  Thank you.  (He takes the jug from her, and brings it to
the cabinet, continuing in the same idle strain)  I really should like
to know your family, Mr. Crampton.  (The parlor maid goes out: and he
pours some hot water into the drinking glass.)

CRAMPTON.  Sorry I can't introduce you, sir.  I'm happy to say that I
don't know where they are, and don't care, so long as they keep out of
my way.  (Valentine, with a hitch of his eyebrows and shoulders, drops
the forceps with a clink into the glass of hot water.)  You needn't warm
that thing to use on me.  I'm not afraid of the cold steel.  (Valentine
stoops to arrange the gas pump and cylinder beside the chair.)  What's
that heavy thing?

VALENTINE.  Oh, never mind.  Something to put my foot on, to get the
necessary purchase for a good pull.  (Crampton looks alarmed in spite of
himself.  Valentine stands upright and places the glass with the forceps
in it ready to his hand, chatting on with provoking indifference.)  And
so you advise me not to get married, Mr. Crampton?  (He stoops to fit
the handle on the apparatus by which the chair is raised and lowered.)

CRAMPTON (irritably).  I advise you to get my tooth out and have done
reminding me of my wife.  Come along, man.  (He grips the arms of the
chair and braces himself.)

VALENTINE (pausing, with his hand on the lever, to look up at him and
say).  What do you bet that I don't get that tooth out without your
feeling it?

CRAMPTON.  Your six week's rent, young man.  Don't you gammon me.

VALENTINE (jumping at the bet and winding him aloft vigorously).
Done!  Are you ready?  (Crampton, who has lost his grip of the chair in
his alarm at its sudden ascent, folds his arms: sits stiffly upright:
and prepares for the worst.  Valentine lets down the back of the chair
to an obtuse angle.)

CRAMPTON (clutching at the arms of the chair as he falls back).  Take
care man.  I'm quite helpless in this po----

VALENTINE (deftly stopping him with the gag, and snatching up the
mouthpiece of the gas machine).  You'll be more helpless presently.  (He
presses the mouthpiece over Crampton's mouth and nose, leaning over his
chest so as to hold his head and shoulders well down on the chair.
Crampton makes an inarticulate sound in the mouthpiece and tries to lay
hands on Valentine, whom he supposes to be in front of him.  After a
moment his arms wave aimlessly, then subside and drop.  He is quite
insensible.  Valentine, with an exclamation of somewhat preoccupied
triumph, throws aside the mouthpiece quickly: picks up the forceps
adroitly from the glass: and ---the curtain falls.)

END OF ACT I.



Act II


On the terrace at the Marine Hotel. It is a square flagged platform,
with a parapet of heavy oil jar pilasters supporting a broad stone
coping on the outer edge, which stands up over the sea like a cliff.
The head waiter of the establishment, busy laying napkins on a luncheon
table with his back to the sea, has the hotel on his right, and on his
left, in the corner nearest the sea, the flight of steps leading down to
the beach.

When he looks down the terrace in front of him he sees a little to
his left a solitary guest, a middle-aged gentleman sitting on a chair of
iron laths at a little iron table with a bowl of lump sugar and three
wasps on it, reading the Standard, with his umbrella up to defend him
from the sun, which, in August and at less than an hour after noon, is
toasting his protended insteps.  Just opposite him, at the hotel side of
the terrace, there is a garden seat of the ordinary esplanade pattern.
Access to the hotel for visitors is by an entrance in the middle of its
facade, reached by a couple of steps on a broad square of raised
pavement.  Nearer the parapet there lurks a way to the kitchen, masked
by a little trellis porch.  The table at which the waiter is occupied is
a long one, set across the terrace with covers and chairs for five, two
at each side and one at the end next the hotel.  Against the parapet
another table is prepared as a buffet to serve from.

The waiter is a remarkable person in his way.  A silky old man,
white-haired and delicate looking, but so cheerful and contented that in
his encouraging presence ambition stands rebuked as vulgarity, and
imagination as treason to the abounding sufficiency and interest of the
actual.  He has a certain expression peculiar to men who have been
extraordinarily successful in their calling, and who, whilst aware of
the vanity of success, are untouched by envy.

The gentleman at the iron table is not dressed for the seaside.  He
wears his London frock coat and gloves; and his tall silk hat is on the
table beside the sugar bowl.  The excellent condition and quality of
these garments, the gold-rimmed folding spectacles through which he is
reading the Standard, and the Times at his elbow overlaying the local
paper, all testify to his respectability.  He is about fifty, clean
shaven, and close-cropped, with the corners of his mouth turned down
purposely, as if he suspected them of wanting to turn up, and was
determined not to let them have their way.  He has large expansive ears,
cod colored eyes, and a brow kept resolutely wide open, as if, again, he
had resolved in his youth to be truthful, magnanimous, and
incorruptible, but had never succeeded in making that habit of mind
automatic and unconscious.  Still, he is by no means to be laughed at.
There is no sign of stupidity or infirmity of will about him: on the
contrary, he would pass anywhere at sight as a man of more than average
professional capacity and responsibility.  Just at present he is
enjoying the weather and the sea too much to be out of patience; but he
has exhausted all the news in his papers and is at present reduced to
the advertisements, which are not sufficiently succulent to induce him
to persevere with them.


THE GENTLEMAN (yawning and giving up the paper as a bad job).
Waiter!

WAITER.  Sir?  (coming down C.)

THE GENTLEMAN.  Are you quite sure Mrs. Clandon is coming back before
lunch?

WAITER.  Quite sure, sir.  She expects you at a quarter to one, sir.
(The gentleman, soothed at once by the waiter's voice, looks at him with
a lazy smile.  It is a quiet voice, with a gentle melody in it that
gives sympathetic interest to his most commonplace remark; and he speaks
with the sweetest propriety, neither dropping his aitches nor misplacing
them, nor committing any other vulgarism.  He looks at his watch as he
continues)  Not that yet, sir, is it?  12:43, sir.  Only two minutes
more to wait, sir.  Nice morning, sir?

THE GENTLEMAN.  Yes: very fresh after London.

WAITER.  Yes, sir: so all our visitors say, sir.  Very nice family,
Mrs. Clandon's, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN.  You like them, do you?

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  They have a free way with them that is very
taking, sir, very taking indeed, sir: especially the young lady and
gentleman.

THE GENTLEMAN.  Miss Dorothea and Mr. Philip, I suppose.

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  The young lady, in giving an order, or the like
of that, will say, "Remember, William, we came to this hotel on your
account, having heard what a perfect waiter you are."  The young
gentleman will tell me that I remind him strongly of his father (the
gentleman starts at this) and that he expects me to act by him as such.
(Soothing, sunny cadence.)  Oh, very peasant, sir, very affable and
pleasant indeed!

THE GENTLEMAN.  You like his father!  (He laughs at the notion.)

WAITER.  Oh, we must not take what they say too seriously, sir.  Of
course, sir, if it were true, the young lady would have seen the
resemblance, too, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN.  Did she?

WAITER.  No, sir.  She thought me like the bust of Shakespear in
Stratford Church, sir.  That is why she calls me William, sir.  My real
name is Walter, sir.  (He turns to go back to the table, and sees Mrs.
Clandon coming up to the terrace from the beach by the steps.)  Here is
Mrs. Clandon, sir.  (To Mrs. Clandon, in an unobtrusively confidential
tone) Gentleman for you, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON.   We shall have two more gentlemen at lunch, William.

WAITER.  Right, ma'am.  Thank you, ma'am.  (He withdraws into the
hotel.  Mrs. Clandon comes forward looking round for her visitor, but
passes over the gentleman without any sign of recognition.)

THE GENTLEMAN  (peering at her quaintly from under the umbrella).
Don't you know me?

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously, looking hard at him)  Are you Finch
McComas?

McCOMAS.  Can't you guess?  (He shuts the umbrella; puts it aside;
and jocularly plants himself with his hands on his hips to be
inspected.)

MRS. CLANDON.  I believe you are.  (She gives him her hand.  The
shake that ensues is that of old friends after a long separation.)
Where's your beard?

McCOMAS (with humorous solemnity).  Would you employ a solicitor with
a beard?

MRS. CLANDON (pointing to the silk hat on the table).  Is that your
hat?

McCOMAS.  Would you employ a solicitor with a sombrero?

MRS. CLANDON.  I have thought of you all these eighteen years with
the beard and the sombrero.  (She sits down on the garden seat.  McComas
takes his chair again.)  Do you go to the meetings of the Dialectical
Society still?

McCOMAS (gravely).  I do not frequent meetings now.

MRS. CLANDON.  Finch: I see what has happened.  You have become
respectable.

McCOMAS.  Haven't you?

MRS. CLANDON.  Not a bit.

McCOMAS.  You hold to your old opinions still?

MRS. CLANDON.  As firmly as ever.

McCOMAS.  Bless me!  And you are still ready to make speeches in
public, in spite of your sex (Mrs. Clandon nods); to insist on a married
woman's right to her own separate property (she nods again); to champion
Darwin's view of the origin of species and John Stuart Mill's essay on
Liberty (nod); to read Huxley, Tyndall and George Eliot (three nods);
and to demand University degrees, the opening of the professions, and
the parliamentary franchise for women as well as men?

MRS. CLANDON (resolutely).  Yes: I have not gone back one inch; and I
have educated Gloria to take up my work where I left it.  That is what
has brought me back to England: I felt that I had no right to bury her
alive in Madeira--my St. Helena, Finch.  I suppose she will be howled at
as I was; but she is prepared for that.

McCOMAS.  Howled at!  My dear good lady: there is nothing in any of
those views now-a-days to prevent her from marrying a bishop.  You
reproached me just now for having become respectable.  You were wrong: I
hold to our old opinions as strongly as ever.  I don't go to church; and
I don't pretend I do.  I call myself what I am: a Philosophic Radical,
standing for liberty and the rights of the individual, as I learnt to do
from my master Herbert Spencer.  Am I howled at?  No: I'm indulged as an
old fogey.  I'm out of everything, because I've refused to bow the knee
to Socialism.

MRS. CLANDON (shocked).  Socialism.

McCOMAS.  Yes, Socialism.  That's what Miss Gloria will be up to her
ears in before the end of the month if you let her loose here.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically).  But I can prove to her that Socialism
is a fallacy.

McCOMAS (touchingly).  It is by proving that, Mrs. Clandon, that I
have lost all my young disciples.  Be careful what you do: let her go
her own way.  (With some bitterness.)  We're old-fashioned: the world
thinks it has left us behind.  There is only one place in all England
where your opinions would still pass as advanced.

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully unconvinced).  The Church, perhaps?

McCOMAS.  No, the theatre.  And now to business!  Why have you made
me come down here?

MRS. CLANDON.  Well, partly because I wanted to see you---

McCOMAS (with good-humored irony).  Thanks.

MRS. CLANDON.  ---and partly because I want you to explain everything
to the children.  They know nothing; and now that we have come back to
England, it is impossible to leave them in ignorance any longer.
(Agitated.)  Finch: I cannot bring myself to tell them.  I--- (She is
interrupted by the twins and Gloria.  Dolly comes tearing up the steps,
racing Philip, who combines a terrific speed with unhurried propriety of
bearing which, however, costs him the race, as Dolly reaches her mother
first and almost upsets the garden seat by the precipitancy of her
arrival.)

DOLLY (breathless).  It's all right, mamma.  The dentist is coming;
and he's bringing his old man.

MRS. CLANDON.  Dolly, dear: don't you see Mr. McComas?  (Mr. McComas
rises, smilingly.)

DOLLY (her face falling with the most disparagingly obvious
disappointment).  This!  Where are the flowing locks?

PHILIP (seconding her warmly).  Where the beard? ---the cloak? ---the
poetic exterior?

DOLLY.  Oh, Mr. McComas, you've gone and spoiled yourself.  Why
didn't you wait till we'd seen you?

McCOMAS (taken aback, but rallying his humor to meet the emergency).
Because eighteen years is too long for a solicitor to go without having
his hair cut.

GLORIA (at the other side of McComas).  How do you do, Mr. McComas?
(He turns; and she takes his hand and presses it, with a frank straight
look into his eyes.)  We are glad to meet you at last.

McCOMAS.  Miss Gloria, I presume?  (Gloria smiles assent, and
releases his hand after a final pressure.  She then retires behind the
garden seat, leaning over the back beside Mrs. Clandon.)  And this young
gentleman?

PHILIP.  I was christened in a comparatively prosaic mood.  My name
is---

DOLLY (completing his sentence for him declamatorily).  "Norval.  On
the Grampian hills"---

PHILIP (declaiming gravely).  "My father feeds his flock, a frugal
swain"---

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Dear, dear children: don't be silly.
Everything is so new to them here, Finch, that they are in the wildest
spirits.  They think every Englishman they meet is a joke.

DOLLY.  Well, so he is: it's not our fault.

PHILIP.  My knowledge of human nature is fairly extensive, Mr.
McComas; but I find it impossible to take the inhabitants of this island
seriously.

McCOMAS.  I presume, sir, you are Master Philip (offering his hand)?

PHILIP (taking McComas's hand and looking solemnly at him).  I was
Master Philip---was so for many years; just as you were once Master
Finch.  (He gives his hand a single shake and drops it; then turns away,
exclaiming meditatively)  How strange it is to look back on our boyhood!
(McComas stares after him, not at all pleased.)

DOLLY (to Mrs. Clandon).  Has Finch had a drink?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Dearest: Mr. McComas will lunch with
us.

DOLLY.  Have you ordered for seven?  Don't forget the old gentleman.

MRS. CLANDON.  I have not forgotten him, dear.  What is his name?

DOLLY.  Chalkstones.  He'll be here at half past one.  (To McComas.)
Are we like what you expected?

MRS. CLANDON (changing her tone to a more earnest one).  Dolly: Mr.
McComas has something more serious than that to tell you.  Children: I
have asked my old friend to answer the question you asked this morning.
He is your father's friend as well as mine: and he will tell you the
story more fairly than I could.  (Turning her head from them to Gloria.)
Gloria: are you satisfied?

GLORIA (gravely attentive).  Mr. McComas is very kind.

McCOMAS (nervously).  Not at all, my dear young lady: not at all.  At
the same time, this is rather sudden.  I was hardly prepared---er---

DOLLY (suspiciously).  Oh, we don't want anything prepared.

PHILIP (exhorting him).  Tell us the truth.

DOLLY (emphatically).  Bald headed.

McCOMAS (nettled).  I hope you intend to take what I have to say
seriously.

PHILIP (with profound mock gravity).  I hope it will deserve it, Mr.
McComas.  My knowledge of human nature teaches me not to expect too
much.

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Phil---

PHILIP.  Yes, mother, all right.  I beg your pardon, Mr. McComas:
don't mind us.

DOLLY (in conciliation).  We mean well.

PHILIP.  Shut up, both.

(Dolly holds her lips.  McComas takes a chair from the luncheon
table; places it between the little table and the garden seat with Dolly
on his right and Philip on his left; and settles himself in it with the
air of a man about to begin a long communication.  The Clandons match
him expectantly.)

McCOMAS.  Ahem!  Your father---

DOLLY (interrupting).  How old is he?

PHILIP.  Sh!

MRS. CLANDON (softly).  Dear Dolly: don't let us interrupt Mr.
McComas.

McCOMAS (emphatically).  Thank you, Mrs. Clandon.  Thank you.  (To
Dolly.)  Your father is fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with a bound, startled and excited).  Fifty-seven!  Where does
he live?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Dolly, Dolly!

McCOMAS (stopping her).  Let me answer that, Mrs. Clandon.  The
answer will surprise you considerably.  He lives in this town.  (Mrs.
Clandon rises.  She and Gloria look at one another in the greatest
consternation.)

DOLLY (with conviction).  I knew it!  Phil: Chalkstones is our
father.

McCOMAS.  Chalkstones!

DOLLY.  Oh, Crampstones, or whatever it is.  He said I was like his
mother.  I knew he must mean his daughter.

PHILIP (very seriously).  Mr. McComas: I desire to consider your
feelings in every possible way: but I warn you that if you stretch the
long arm of coincidence to the length of telling me that Mr. Crampton of
this town is my father, I shall decline to entertain the information for
a moment.

McCOMAS.  And pray why?

PHILIP.  Because I have seen the gentleman; and he is entirely unfit
to be my father, or Dolly's father, or Gloria's father, or my mother's
husband.

McCOMAS.  Oh, indeed!  Well, sir, let me tell you that whether you
like it or not, he is your father, and your sister' father, and Mrs.
Clandon's husband.  Now!  What have you to say to that!

DOLLY (whimpering).  You needn't be so cross.  Crampton isn't your
father.

PHILIP.  Mr. McComas: your conduct is heartless.  Here you find a
family enjoying the unspeakable peace and freedom of being orphans.  We
have never seen the face of a relative---never known a claim except the
claim of freely chosen friendship.  And now you wish to thrust into the
most intimate relationship with us a man whom we don't know---

DOLLY (vehemently).  An awful old man!  (reproachfully)  And you
began as if you had quite a nice father for us.

McCOMAS (angrily).  How do you know that he is not nice?  And what
right have you to choose your own father?  (raising his voice.)  Let me
tell you, Miss Clandon, that you are too young to---

DOLLY (interrupting him suddenly and eagerly).  Stop, I forgot!  Has
he any money?

McCOMAS.  He has a great deal of money.

DOLLY (delighted).  Oh, what did I always say, Phil?

PHILIP.  Dolly: we have perhaps been condemning the old man too
hastily.  Proceed, Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS.  I shall not proceed, sir.  I am too hurt, too shocked, to
proceed.

MRS. CLANDON (urgently).  Finch: do you realize what is happening?
Do you understand that my children have invited that man to lunch, and
that he will be here in a few moments?

McCOMAS (completely upset).  What!  do you mean---am I to understand-
--is it---

PHILIP (impressively).  Steady, Finch.  Think it out slowly and
carefully.  He's coming---coming to lunch.

GLORIA.  Which of us is to tell him the truth?  Have you thought of
that?

MRS. CLANDON.  Finch: you must tell him.

DOLLY  Oh, Finch is no good at telling things.  Look at the mess he
has made of telling us.

McCOMAS.  I have not been allowed to speak.  I protest against this.

DOLLY (taking his arm coaxingly).  Dear Finch: don't be cross.

MRS. CLANDON.  Gloria: let us go in.  He may arrive at any moment.

GLORIA (proudly).  Do not stir, mother.  I shall not stir.  We must
not run away.

MRS. CLANDON (delicately rebuking her).  My dear: we cannot sit down
to lunch just as we are.  We shall come back again.  We must have no
bravado.  (Gloria winces, and goes into the hotel without a word.)
Come, Dolly.  (As she goes into the hotel door, the waiter comes out
with plates, etc., for two additional covers on a tray.)

WAITER.  Gentlemen come yet, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON.  Two more to come yet, thank you.  They will be here,
immediately.  (She goes into the hotel.  The waiter takes his tray
to the service table.)

PHILIP.  I have an idea.  Mr. McComas: this communication should be
made, should it not, by a man of infinite tact?

McCOMAS.  It will require tact, certainly.

PHILIP  Good!  Dolly: whose tact were you noticing only this morning?

DOLLY (seizing the idea with rapture).  Oh, yes, I declare!  William!

PHILIP.  The very man!  (Calling)  William!

WAITER.  Coming, sir.

McCOMAS (horrified).  The waiter!   Stop, stop!  I will not permit
this.  I---

WAITER (presenting himself between Philip and McComas).  Yes, sir.
(McComas's complexion fades into stone grey; and all movement and
expression desert his eyes.  He sits down stupefied.)

PHILIP.  William: you remember my request to you to regard me as your
son?

WAITER (with respectful indulgence).  Yes, sir.  Anything you please,
sir.

PHILIP.  William: at the very outset of your career as my father, a
rival has appeared on the scene.

WAITER.  Your real father, sir?  Well, that was to be expected,
sooner or later, sir, wasn't it?  (Turning with a happy smile to
McComas.)  Is it you, sir?

McCOMAS (renerved by indignation).  Certainly not.  My children know
how to behave themselves.

PHILIP.  No, William: this gentleman was very nearly my father: he
wooed my mother, but wooed her in vain.

McCOMAS (outraged).  Well, of all the---

PHILIP.  Sh!  Consequently, he is only our solicitor.  Do you know
one Crampton, of this town?

WAITER.  Cock-eyed Crampton, sir, of the Crooked Billet, is it?

PHILIP.  I don't know.  Finch: does he keep a public house?

McCOMAS (rising scandalized).  No, no, no.  Your father, sir, is a
well-known yacht builder, an eminent man here.

WAITER (impressed).  Oh, beg pardon, sir, I'm sure.  A son of Mr.
Crampton's!  Dear me!

PHILIP.  Mr. Crampton is coming to lunch with us.

WAITER (puzzled).  Yes, sir.  (Diplomatically.)  Don't usually lunch
with his family, perhaps, sir?

PHILIP (impressively).  William: he does not know that we are his
family.  He has not seen us for eighteen years.  He won't know us.  (To
emphasize the communication he seats himself on the iron table with a
spring, and looks at the waiter with his lips compressed and his legs
swinging.)

DOLLY.  We want you to break the news to him, William.

WAITER.  But I should think he'd guess when he sees your mother,
miss.  (Philip's legs become motionless at this elucidation.  He
contemplates the waiter raptly.)

DOLLY (dazzled).  I never thought of that.

PHILIP.  Nor I.  (Coming off the table and turning reproachfully on
McComas.)  Nor you.

DOLLY.  And you a solicitor!

PHILIP.  Finch: Your professional incompetence is appalling.
William: your sagacity puts us all to shame.

DOLLY  You really are like Shakespear, William.

WAITER.  Not at all, sir.  Don't mention it, miss.  Most happy, I'm
sure, sir.  (Goes back modestly to the luncheon table and lays the two
additional covers, one at the end next the steps, and the other so as to
make a third on the side furthest from the balustrade.)

PHILIP (abruptly).  Finch: come and wash your hands.  (Seizes his arm
and leads him toward the hotel.)

McCOMAS.  I am thoroughly vexed and hurt, Mr. Clandon---

PHILIP (interrupting him).  You will get used to us.  Come, Dolly.
(McComas shakes him off and marches into the hotel.  Philip follows with
unruffled composure.)

DOLLY (turning for a moment on the steps as she follows them).  Keep
your wits about you, William.  There will be fire-works.

WAITER.  Right, miss.  You may depend on me, miss.  (She goes into
the hotel.)

(Valentine comes lightly up the steps from the beach, followed
doggedly by Crampton.  Valentine carries a walking stick.  Crampton,
either because he is old and chilly, or with some idea of extenuating
the unfashionableness of his reefer jacket, wears a light overcoat.  He
stops at the chair left by McComas in the middle of the terrace, and
steadies himself for a moment by placing his hand on the back of it.)

CRAMPTON.  Those steps make me giddy.  (He passes his hand over his
forehead.)  I have not got over that infernal gas yet.

(He goes to the iron chair, so that he can lean his elbows on the
little table to prop his head as he sits.  He soon recovers, and begins
to unbutton his overcoat.  Meanwhile Valentine interviews the waiter.)

VALENTINE.  Waiter!

WAITER (coming forward between them).  Yes, sir.

VALENTINE.  Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon.

WAITER (with a sweet smile of welcome).  Yes, sir.  We're expecting
you, sir.  That is your table, sir.  Mrs. Clandon will be down
presently, sir.  The young lady and young gentleman were just talking
about your friend, sir.

VALENTINE.  Indeed!

WAITER (smoothly melodious).   Yes, sire.  Great flow of spirits,
sir.  A vein of pleasantry, as you might say, sir.  (Quickly, to
Crampton, who has risen to get the overcoat off.)  Beg pardon, sir, but
if you'll allow me (helping him to get the overcoat off and taking it
from him).  Thank you, sir.  (Crampton sits down again; and the waiter
resumes the broken melody.)  The young gentleman's latest is that you're
his father, sir.

CRAMPTON.  What!

WAITER.  Only his joke, sir, his favourite joke.  Yesterday, I was to
be his father.  To-day, as soon as he knew you were coming, sir, he
tried to put it up on me that you were his father, his long lost father-
--not seen you for eighteen years, he said.

CRAMPTON (startled).  Eighteen years!

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  (With gentle archness.)  But I was up to his
tricks, sir.  I saw the idea coming into his head as he stood there,
thinking what new joke he'd have with me.  Yes, sir: that's the sort he
is: very pleasant, ve--ry off hand and affable indeed, sir.  (Again
changing his tempo to say to Valentine, who is putting his stick down
against the corner of the garden seat)  If you'll allow me, sir?
(Taking Valentine's stick.)  Thank you, sir.  (Valentine strolls up to
the luncheon table and looks at the menu.  The waiter turns to Crampton
and resumes his lay.)  Even the solicitor took up the joke, although he
was in a manner of speaking in my confidence about the young gentleman,
sir.  Yes, sir, I assure you, sir.  You would never imagine what
respectable professional gentlemen from London will do on an outing,
when the sea air takes them, sir.

CRAMPTON.  Oh, there's a solicitor with them, is there?

WAITER.  The family solicitor, sir---yes, sir.  Name of McComas, sir.
(He goes towards hotel entrance with coat and stick, happily unconscious
of the bomblike effect the name has produced on Crampton.)

CRAMPTON (rising in angry alarm).  McComas!  (Calls to Valentine.)
Valentine!  (Again, fiercely.)  Valentine!!  (Valentine turns.)  This is
a plant, a conspiracy.  This is my family---my children--my infernal
wife.

VALENTINE (coolly).  On, indeed!  Interesting meeting!  (He resumes
his study of the menu.)

CRAMPTON.  Meeting!  Not for me.  Let me out of this.  (Calling to
the waiter.)  Give me that coat.

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  (He comes back, puts Valentine's stick carefully
down against the luncheon table; and delicately shakes the coat out and
holds it for Crampton to put on.)  I seem to have done the young
gentleman an injustice, sir, haven't I, sir.

CRAMPTON.  Rrrh!  (He stops on the point of putting his arms into the
sleeves, and turns to Valentine with sudden suspicion.)  Valentine: you
are in this.  You made this plot.  You---

VALENTINE (decisively).  Bosh!  (He throws the menu down and goes
round the table to look out unconcernedly over the parapet.)

CRAMPTON (angrily).  What d'ye--- (McComas, followed by Philip and
Dolly, comes out.  He vacillates for a moment on seeing Crampton.)

WAITER (softly--interrupting Crampton).  Steady, sir.  Here they
come, sir.  (He takes up the stick and makes for the hotel, throwing the
coat across his arm.  McComas turns the corners of his mouth resolutely
down and crosses to Crampton, who draws back and glares, with his hands
behind him.  McComas, with his brow opener than ever, confronts him in
the majesty of a spotless conscience.)

WAITER (aside, as he passes Philip on his way out).  I've broke it to
him, sir.

PHILIP.  Invaluable William!  (He passes on to the table.)

DOLLY (aside to the waiter).  How did he take it?

WAITER (aside to her).  Startled at first, miss; but resigned---very
resigned, indeed, miss.  (He takes the stick and coat into the hotel.)

McCOMAS (having stared Crampton out of countenance).  So here you
are, Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON.  Yes, here--caught in a trap--a mean trap.  Are those my
children?

PHILIP (with deadly politeness).  Is this our father, Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS.  Yes--er---  (He loses countenance himself and stops.)

DOLLY (conventionally).  Pleased to meet you again.  (She wanders
idly round the table, exchanging a smile and a word of greeting with
Valentine on the way.)

PHILIP.  Allow me to discharge my first duty as host by ordering your
wine.  (He takes the wine list from the table.  His polite attention,
and Dolly's unconcerned indifference, leave Crampton on the footing of
the casual acquaintance picked up that morning at the dentist's.  The
consciousness of it goes through the father with so keen a pang that he
trembles all over; his brow becomes wet; and he stares dumbly at his
son, who, just conscious enough of his own callousness to intensely
enjoy the humor and adroitness of it, proceeds pleasantly.)  Finch: some
crusted old port for you, as a respectable family solicitor, eh?

McCOMAS (firmly).  Apollinaris only.  I prefer to take nothing
heating.  (He walks away to the side of the terrace, like a man putting
temptation behind him.)

PHILIP.  Valentine---?

VALENTINE.  Would Lager be considered vulgar?

PHILIP.  Probably.  We'll order some.  Dolly takes it.  (Turning to
Crampton with cheerful politeness.)  And now, Mr. Crampton, what can we
do for you?

CRAMPTON.  What d'ye mean, boy?

PHILIP.  Boy!  (Very solemnly.)  Whose fault is it that I am a boy?

(Crampton snatches the wine list rudely from him and irresolutely
pretends to read it.  Philip abandons it to him with perfect
politeness.)

DOLLY (looking over Crampton's right shoulder).  The whisky's on the
last page but one.

CRAMPTON.  Let me alone, child.

DOLLY.  Child!  No, no: you may call me Dolly if you like; but you
mustn't call me child.  (She slips her arm through Philip's; and the two
stand looking at Crampton as if he were some eccentric stranger.)

CRAMPTON (mopping his brow in rage and agony, and yet relieved even
by their playing with him).  McComas: we are--ha!--going to have a
pleasant meal.

McCOMAS (pusillanimously).  There is no reason why it should not be
pleasant.  (He looks abjectly gloomy.)

PHILIP.  Finch's face is a feast in itself.  (Mrs. Clandon and Gloria
come from the hotel.  Mrs. Clandon advances with courageous self-
possession and marked dignity of manner.  She stops at the foot of the
steps to address Valentine, who is in her path.  Gloria also stops,
looking at Crampton with a certain repulsion.)

MRS. CLANDON.  Glad to see you again, Mr. Valentine.  (He smiles.
She passes on and confronts Crampton, intending to address him with
perfect composure; but his aspect shakes her.  She stops suddenly and
says anxiously, with a touch of remorse.)  Fergus: you are greatly
changed.

CRAMPTON (grimly).  I daresay.  A man does change in eighteen years.

MRS. CLANDON (troubled).  I--I did not mean that.  I hope your health
is good.

CRAMPTON.  Thank you.  No: it's not my health.  It's my happiness:
that's the change you meant, I think.  (Breaking out suddenly.)  Look at
her, McComas!  Look at her; and look at me!  (He utters a half laugh,
half sob.)

PHILIP.  Sh!  (Pointing to the hotel entrance, where the waiter has
just appeared.)  Order before William!

DOLLY (touching Crampton's arm warningly with her finger).
Ahem!  (The waiter goes to the service table and beckons to the kitchen
entrance, whence issue a young waiter with soup plates, and a cook, in
white apron and cap, with the soup tureen.  The young waiter remains and
serves: the cook goes out, and reappears from time to time bringing in
the courses.  He carves, but does not serve.  The waiter comes to the
end of the luncheon table next the steps.)

MRS. CLANDON (as they all assemble about the table).  I think you
have all met one another already to-day.  Oh, no, excuse me.
(Introducing)  Mr. Valentine: Mr. McComas.  (She goes to the end of the
table nearest the hotel.)  Fergus: will you take the head of the table,
please.

CRAMPTON.  Ha!  (Bitterly.)  The head of the table!

WAITER (holding the chair for him with inoffensive encouragement).
This end, sir.  (Crampton submits, and takes his seat.)  Thank you, sir.

MRS. CLANDON.  Mr. Valentine: will you take that side (indicating the
side nearest the parapet) with Gloria?  (Valentine and Gloria take their
places, Gloria next Crampton and Valentine next Mrs. Clandon.)  Finch: I
must put you on this side, between Dolly and Phil.  You must protect
yourself as best you can.  (The three take the remaining side of the
table, Dolly next her mother, Phil next his father, and McComas between
them.  Soup is served.)

WAITER (to Crampton).  Thick or clear, sir?

CRAMPTON (to Mrs. Clandon).  Does nobody ask a blessing in this
household?

PHILIP (interposing smartly).  Let us first settle what we are about
to receive.  William!

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  (He glides swiftly round the table to Phil's left
elbow.  On his way he whispers to the young waiter)  Thick.

PHILIP.  Two small Lagers for the children as usual, William; and one
large for this gentleman (indicating Valentine).  Large Apollinaris for
Mr. McComas.

WAITER.  Yes, sir.

DOLLY.  Have a six of Irish in it, Finch?

McCOMAS (scandalized).  No--no, thank you.

PHILIP.  Number 413 for my mother and Miss Gloria as before; and--
(turning enquiringly to Crampton)  Eh?

CRAMPTON (scowling and about to reply offensively).  I---

WAITER (striking in mellifluously).  All right, sir.  We know what
Mr. Crampton likes here, sir.  (He goes into the hotel.)

PHILIP (looking gravely at his father).  You frequent bars.  Bad
habit!  (The cook, accompanied by a waiter with a supply of hot plates,
brings in the fish from the kitchen to the service table, and begins
slicing it.)

CRAMPTON.  You have learnt your lesson from your mother, I see.

MRS. CLANDON.  Phil: will you please remember that your jokes are apt
to irritate people who are not accustomed to us, and that your father is
our guest to-day.

CRAMPTON (bitterly).  Yes, a guest at the head of my own table.  (The
soup plates are removed.)

DOLLY (sympathetically).  Yes: it's embarrassing, isn't it?  It's
just as bad for us, you know.

PHILIP.  Sh!  Dolly: we are both wanting in tact.  (To Crampton.)  We
mean well, Mr. Crampton; but we are not yet strong in the filial line.
(The waiter returns from the hotel with the drinks.)  William: come and
restore good feeling.

WAITER (cheerfully).  Yes, sir.  Certainly, sir.  Small Lager for
you, sir.  (To Crampton.)  Seltzer and Irish, sir.  (To McComas.)
Apollinaris, sir.  (To Dolly.)  Small Lager, miss.  (To Mrs. Clandon,
pouring out wine.)  413, madam.  (To Valentine.)  Large Lager for you,
sir.  (To Gloria.)  413, miss.

DOLLY (drinking).  To the family!

PHILIP. (drinking).  Hearth and Home!  (Fish is served.)

McCOMAS (with an obviously forced attempt at cheerful domesticity).
We are getting on very nicely after all.

DOLLY (critically).  After all!  After all what, Finch?

CRAMPTON (sarcastically).  He means that you are getting on very
nicely in spite of the presence of your father.  Do I take your point
rightly, Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS (disconcerted).  No, no.  I only said "after all" to round
off the sentence.  I---er---er---er----

WAITER (tactfully).  Turbot, sir?

McCOMAS (intensely grateful for the interruption).  Thank you,
waiter: thank you.

WAITER (sotto voce).  Don't mention it, sir.  (He returns to the
service table.)

CRAMPTON (to Phil).  Have you thought of choosing a profession yet?

PHILIP.  I am keeping my mind open on that subject.  William!

WAITER.  Yes, sir.

PHILIP.  How long do you think it would take me to learn to be a
really smart waiter?

WAITER.  Can't be learnt, sir.  It's in the character, sir.
(Confidentially to Valentine, who is looking about for something.)
Bread for the lady, sir? yes, sir.  (He serves bread to Gloria, and
resumes at his former pitch.)  Very few are born to it, sir.

PHILIP.  You don't happen to have such a thing as a son, yourself,
have you?

WAITER.  Yes, sir: oh, yes, sir.  (To Gloria, again dropping his
voice.)  A little more fish, miss? you won't care for the joint in the
middle of the day.

GLORIA.  No, thank you.  (The fish plates are removed.)

DOLLY.  Is your son a waiter, too, William?

WAITER (serving Gloria with fowl).  Oh, no, miss, he's too impetuous.
He's at the Bar.

McCOMAS (patronizingly).  A potman, eh?

WAITER (with a touch of melancholy, as if recalling a disappointment
softened by time).  No, sir: the other bar---your profession, sir.  A
Q.C., sir.

McCOMAS (embarrassed).  I'm sure I beg your pardon.

WAITER.  Not at all, sir.  Very natural mistake, I'm sure, sir.  I've
often wished he was a potman, sir.  Would have been off my hands ever so
much sooner, sir.  (Aside to Valentine, who is again in difficulties.)
Salt at your elbow, sir.  (Resuming.)  Yes, sir: had to support him
until he was thirty-seven, sir.  But doing well now, sir: very
satisfactory indeed, sir.  Nothing less than fifty guineas, sir.

McCOMAS.  Democracy, Crampton!---modern democracy!

WAITER (calmly).  No, sir, not democracy: only education, sir.
Scholarships, sir.  Cambridge Local, sir.  Sidney Sussex College, sir.
(Dolly plucks his sleeve and whispers as he bends down.)  Stone ginger,
miss?  Right, miss.  (To McComas.)  Very good thing for him, sir: he
never had any turn for real work, sir.  (He goes into the hotel, leaving
the company somewhat overwhelmed by his son's eminence.)

VALENTINE.  Which of us dare give that man an order again!

DOLLY.  I hope he won't mind my sending him for ginger-beer.

CRAMPTON (doggedly).  While he's a waiter it's his business to wait.
If you had treated him as a waiter ought to be treated, he'd have held
his tongue.

DOLLY.  What a loss that would have been!  Perhaps he'll give us an
introduction to his son and get us into London society.  (The waiter
reappears with the ginger-beer.)

CRAMPTON (growling contemptuously).  London society!  London
society!!  You're not fit for any society, child.

DOLLY (losing her temper).  Now look here, Mr. Crampton.  If you
think---

WAITER (softly, at her elbow).  Stone ginger, miss.

DOLLY (taken aback, recovers her good humor after a long breath and
says sweetly).  Thank you, dear William.  You were just in time.  (She
drinks.)

McCOMAS (making a fresh effort to lead the conversation into
dispassionate regions).  If I may be allowed to change the subject, Miss
Clandon, what is the established religion in Madeira?

GLORIA.  I suppose the Portuguese religion.  I never inquired.

DOLLY.  The servants come in Lent and kneel down before you and
confess all the things they've done: and you have to pretend to forgive
them. Do they do that in England, William?

WAITER.  Not usually, miss.  They may in some parts: but it has not
come under my notice, miss.  (Catching Mrs. Clandon's eye as the young
waiter offers her the salad bowl.)  You like it without dressing, ma'am:
yes, ma'am, I have some for you.  (To his young colleague, motioning him
to serve Gloria.)  This side, Jo.  (He takes a special portion of salad
from the service table and puts it beside Mrs. Clandon's plate.  In
doing so he observes that Dolly is making a wry face.)  Only a bit of
watercress, miss, got in by mistake.  (He takes her salad away.)  Thank
you, miss.   (To the young waiter, admonishing him to serve Dolly
afresh.)  Jo.  (Resuming.)  Mostly members of the Church of England,
miss.

DOLLY.  Members of the Church of England!  What's the subscription?

CRAMPTON (rising violently amid general consternation).  You see how
my children have been brought up, McComas.  You see it; you hear it.  I
call all of you to witness---  (He becomes inarticulate, and is about to
strike his fist recklessly on the table when the waiter considerately
takes away his plate.)

MRS. CLANDON (firmly).  Sit down, Fergus.  There is no occasion at
all for this outburst.  You must remember that Dolly is just like a
foreigner here.  Pray sit down.

CRAMPTON (subsiding unwillingly).  I doubt whether I ought to sit
here and countenance all this.  I doubt it.

WAITER.  Cheese, sir; or would you like a cold sweet?

CRAMPTON (take aback).  What?  Oh!---cheese, cheese.

DOLLY.  Bring a box of cigarets, William.

WAITER.  All ready, miss.  (He takes a box of cigarets from the
service table and places them before Dolly, who selects one and prepares
to smoke.  He then returns to his table for a box of vestas.)

CRAMPTON (staring aghast at Dolly).  Does she smoke?

DOLLY (out of patience).  Really, Mr. Crampton, I'm afraid I'm
spoiling your lunch.  I'll go and have my cigaret on the beach.  (She
leaves the table with petulant suddenness and goes down the steps.  The
waiter attempts to give her the matches; but she is gone before he can
reach her.)

CRAMPTON (furiously).  Margaret: call that girl back.  Call her back,
I say.

McCOMAS (trying to make peace).  Come, Crampton: never mind.  She's
her father's daughter: that's all.

MRS. CLANDON (with deep resentment).  I hope not, Finch.  (She rises:
they all rise a little.)  Mr. Valentine: will you excuse me: I am afraid
Dolly is hurt and put out by what has passed.  I must go to her.

CRAMPTON.  To take her part against me, you mean.

MRS. CLANDON (ignoring him).  Gloria: will you take my place whilst I
am away, dear.  (She crosses to the steps.  Crampton's eyes follow her
with bitter hatred.  The rest watch her in embarrassed silence, feeling
the incident to be a very painful one.)

WAITER (intercepting her at the top of the steps and offering her a
box of vestas).  Young lady forgot the matches, ma'am.  If you would be
so good, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON (surprised into grateful politeness by the witchery of
his sweet and cheerful tones).  Thank you very much.  (She takes the
matches and goes down to the beach.  The waiter shepherds his assistant
along with him into the hotel by the kitchen entrance, leaving the
luncheon party to themselves.)

CRAMPTON (throwing himself back in his chair).  There's a mother for
you, McComas!  There's a mother for you!

GLORIA (steadfastly).  Yes: a good mother.

CRAMPTON.  And a bad father?  That's what you mean, eh?

VALENTINE (rising indignantly and addressing Gloria).  Miss Clandon:
I---

CRAMPTON (turning on him).  That girl's name is Crampton, Mr.
Valentine, not Clandon.  Do you wish to join them in insulting me?

VALENTINE (ignoring him).  I'm overwhelmed, Miss Clandon.  It's all
my fault: I brought him here: I'm responsible for him.  And I'm ashamed
of him.

CRAMPTON.  What d'y' mean?

GLORIA (rising coldly).  No harm has been done, Mr. Valentine.  We
have all been a little childish, I am afraid.  Our party has been a
failure: let us break it up and have done with it.  (She puts her chair
aside and turns to the steps, adding, with slighting composure, as she
passes Crampton.)  Good-bye, father.

(She descends the steps with cold, disgusted indifference.  They all
look after her, and so do not notice the return of the waiter from the
hotel, laden with Crampton's coat, Valentine's stick, a couple of shawls
and parasols, a white canvas umbrella, and some camp stools.)

CRAMPTON (to himself, staring after Gloria with a ghastly
expression).  Father!  Father!!  (He strikes his fist violently on the
table.)  Now---

WAITER (offering the coat).  This is yours, sir, I think, sir.
(Crampton glares at him; then snatches it rudely and comes down the
terrace towards the garden seat, struggling with the coat in his angry
efforts to put it on.  McComas rises and goes to his assistance; then
takes his hat and umbrella from the little iron table, and turns towards
the steps.  Meanwhile the waiter, after thanking Crampton with unruffled
sweetness for taking the coat, offers some of his burden to Phil.)  The
ladies' sunshades, sir.  Nasty glare off the sea to-day, sir: very
trying to the complexion, sir.  I shall carry down the camp stools
myself, sir.

PHILIP.  You are old, Father William; but you are the most
considerate of men.  No: keep the sunshades and give me the camp stools
(taking them).

WAITER (with flattering gratitude).  Thank you, sir.

PHILIP.  Finch: share with me (giving him a couple).  Come along.
(They go down the steps together.)

VALENTINE (to the waiter).  Leave me something to bring down--one of
these.  (Offering to take a sunshade.)

WAITER (discreetly).  That's the younger lady's, sir.  (Valentine
lets it go.)  Thank you, sir.  If you'll allow me, sir, I think you had
better have this.  (He puts down the sunshades on Crampton's chair, and
produces from the tail pocket of his dress coat, a book with a lady's
handkerchief between the leaves, marking the page.)  The eldest young
lady is reading it at present.  (Valentine takes it eagerly.)  Thank
you, sir.  Schopenhauer, sir, you see.  (He takes up the sunshades
again.)  Very interesting author, sir: especially on the subject of
ladies, sir.  (He goes down the steps.  Valentine, about to follow him,
recollects Crampton and changes his mind.)

VALENTINE (coming rather excitedly to Crampton).  Now look here,
Crampton: are you at all ashamed of yourself?

CRAMPTON (pugnaciously).  Ashamed of myself!  What for?

VALENTINE.  For behaving like a bear.  What will your daughter think
of me for having brought you here?

CRAMPTON.  I was not thinking of what my daughter was thinking of
you.

VALENTINE.  No, you were thinking of yourself.  You're a perfect
maniac.

CRAMPTON (heartrent).  She told you what I am---a father---a father
robbed of his children.  What are the hearts of this generation like?
Am I to come here after all these years---to see what my children are
for the first time!  to hear their voices!---and carry it all off like a
fashionable visitor; drop in to lunch; be Mr. Crampton---M i s t e r
Crampton!  What right have they to talk to me like that?  I'm their
father: do they deny that?  I'm a man, with the feelings of our common
humanity: have I no rights, no claims?  In all these years who have I
had round me?  Servants, clerks, business acquaintances.  I've had
respect from them---aye, kindness.  Would one of them have spoken to me
as that girl spoke?---would one of them have laughed at me as that boy
was laughing at me all the time?  (Frantically.)  My own children!
M i s t e r  Crampton!  My---

VALENTINE.  Come, come: they're only children.  The only one of them
that's worth anything called you father.

CRAMPTON (wildly).  Yes: "good-bye, father."  Oh, yes: she got at my
feelings---with a stab!

VALENTINE (taking this in very bad part).  Now look here, Crampton:
you just let her alone: she's treated you very well.  I had a much worse
time of it at lunch than you.

CRAMPTON.  You!

VALENTINE (with growing impetuosity).  Yes: I.  I sat next to her;
and I never said a single thing to her the whole time---couldn't think
of a blessed word.  And not a word did she say to me.

CRAMPTON.  Well?

VALENTINE.  Well?  Well???  (Tackling him very seriously and talking
faster and faster.)  Crampton: do you know what's been the matter with
me to-day?  You don't suppose, do you, that I'm in the habit of playing
such tricks on my patients as I played on you?

CRAMPTON.  I hope not.

VALENTINE.  The explanation is that I'm stark mad, or rather that
I've never been in my real senses before.  I'm capable of anything: I've
grown up at last: I'm a Man; and it's your daughter that's made a man of
me.

CRAMPTON (incredulously).  Are you in love with my daughter?

VALENTINE (his words now coming in a perfect torrent).  Love!
Nonsense: it's something far above and beyond that.  It's life, it's
faith, it's strength, certainty, paradise---

CRAMPTON (interrupting him with acrid contempt).  Rubbish, man!  What
have you to keep a wife on?  You can't marry her.

VALENTINE.  Who wants to marry her?  I'll kiss her hands; I'll kneel
at her feet; I'll live for her; I'll die for her; and that'll be enough
for me.  Look at her book!  See!  (He kisses the handkerchief.)  If you
offered me all your money for this excuse for going down to the beach
and speaking to her again, I'd only laugh at you.  (He rushes buoyantly
off to the steps, where he bounces right into the arms of the waiter,
who is coming up form the beach.  The two save themselves from falling
by clutching one another tightly round the waist and whirling one
another around.)

WAITER (delicately).  Steady, sir, steady.

VALENTINE (shocked at his own violence).  I beg your pardon.

WAITER.  Not at all, sir, not at all.  Very natural, sir, I'm sure,
sir, at your age.  The lady has sent me for her book, sir.  Might I take
the liberty of asking you to let her have it at once, sir?

VALENTINE.  With pleasure.  And if you will allow me to present you
with a professional man's earnings for six weeks--- (offering him
Dolly's crown piece.)

WAITER (as if the sum were beyond his utmost expectations).  Thank
you, sir: much obliged.  (Valentine dashes down the steps.)  Very high-
spirited young gentleman, sir: very manly and straight set up.

CRAMPTON (in grumbling disparagement).  And making his fortune in a
hurry, no doubt.  I know what his six weeks' earnings come to.  (He
crosses the terrace to the iron table, and sits down.)

WAITER (philosophically).  Well, sir, you never can tell.  That's a
principle in life with me, sir, if you'll excuse my having such a thing,
sir.  (Delicately sinking the philosopher in the waiter for a moment.)
Perhaps you haven't noticed that you hadn't touched that seltzer and
Irish, sir, when the party broke up.  (He takes the tumbler from the
luncheon table, and sets if before Crampton.)  Yes, sir, you never can
tell.  There was my son, sir! who ever thought that he would rise to
wear a silk gown, sir?  And yet to-day, sir, nothing less than fifty
guineas, sir.  What a lesson, sir!

CRAMPTON.  Well, I hope he is grateful to you, and recognizes what he
owes you.

WAITER.  We get on together very well, very well indeed, sir,
considering the difference in our stations.  (With another of his
irresistible transitions.)  A small lump of sugar, sir, will take the
flatness out of the seltzer without noticeably sweetening the drink,
sir.  Allow me, sir.  (He drops a lump of sugar into the tumbler.)  But
as I say to him, where's the difference after all?  If I must put on a
dress coat to show what I am, sir, he must put on a wig and gown to show
what he is.  If my income is mostly tips, and there's a pretence that I
don't get them, why, his income is mostly fees, sir; and I understand
there's a pretence that he don't get them!  If he likes society, and his
profession brings him into contact with all ranks, so does mine, too,
sir.  If it's a little against a barrister to have a waiter for his
father, sir, it's a little against a waiter to have a barrister for a
son: many people consider it a great liberty, sir, I assure you, sir.
Can I get you anything else, sir?

CRAMPTON.  No, thank you.  (With bitter humility.)  I suppose that's
no objection to my sitting here for a while: I can't disturb the party
on the beach here.

WAITER (with emotion).  Very kind of you, sir, to put it as if it was
not a compliment and an honour to us, Mr. Crampton, very kind indeed.
The more you are at home here, sir, the better for us.

CRAMPTON (in poignant irony).  Home!

WAITER (reflectively).  Well, yes, sir: that's a way of looking at
it, too, sir.  I have always said that the great advantage of a hotel is
that it's a refuge from home life, sir.

CRAMPTON.  I missed that advantage to-day, I think.

WAITER.  You did, sir, you did.  Dear me!  It's the unexpected that
always happens, isn't it?  (Shaking his head.)  You never can tell, sir:
you never can tell. (He goes into the hotel.)

CRAMPTON (his eyes shining hardly as he props his drawn, miserable
face on his hands).  Home!  Home!!  (He drops his arms on the table and
bows his head on them, but presently hears someone approaching and
hastily sits bolt upright.  It is Gloria, who has come up the steps
alone, with her sunshade and her book in her hands.  He looks defiantly
at her, with the brutal obstinacy of his mouth and the wistfulness of
his eyes contradicting each other pathetically.  She comes to the corner
of the garden seat and stands with her back to it, leaning against the
end of it, and looking down at him as if wondering at his weakness: too
curious about him to be cold, but supremely indifferent to their
kinship.)  Well?

GLORIA.  I want to speak with you for a moment.

CRAMPTON (looking steadily at her).  Indeed?  That's surprising.  You
meet your father after eighteen years; and you actually want to speak to
him for a moment!  That's touching: isn't it?  (He rests his head on his
hands, and looks down and away from her, in gloomy reflection.)

GLORIA.  All that is what seems to me so nonsensical, so uncalled
for.  What do you expect us to feel for you---to do for you?  What is it
you want?  Why are you less civil to us than other people are?  You are
evidently not very fond of us---why should you be?  But surely we can
meet without quarrelling.

CRAMPTON (a dreadful grey shade passing over his face).  Do you
realize that I am your father?

GLORIA.  Perfectly.

CRAMPTON.  Do you know what is due to me as your father?

GLORIA.  For instance----?

CRAMPTON (rising as if to combat a monster).  For instance!  For
instance!!  For instance, duty, affection, respect, obedience---

GLORIA (quitting her careless leaning attitude and confronting him
promptly and proudly).  I obey nothing but my sense of what is right.  I
respect nothing that is not noble.  That is my duty.  (She adds, less
firmly)  As to affection, it is not within my control.  I am not sure
that I quite know what affection means.  (She turns away with an evident
distaste for that part of the subject, and goes to the luncheon table
for a comfortable chair, putting down her book and sunshade.)

CRAMPTON (following her with his eyes).  Do you really mean what you
are saying?

GLORIA (turning on him quickly and severely).  Excuse me: that is an
uncivil question.  I am speaking seriously to you; and I expect you to
take me seriously.  (She takes one of the luncheon chairs; turns it away
from the table; and sits down a little wearily, saying)  Can you not
discuss this matter coolly and rationally?

CRAMPTON.  Coolly and rationally!  No, I can't.  Do you understand
that?  I can't.

GLORIA (emphatically).  No.  That I  c a n n o t  understand.  I have
no sympathy with---

CRAMPTON (shrinking nervously).  Stop!  Don't say anything more yet;
you don't know what you're doing.  Do you want to drive me mad?  (She
frowns, finding such petulance intolerable.  He adds hastily)  No: I'm
not angry: indeed I'm not.  Wait, wait: give me a little time to think.
(He stands for a moment, screwing and clinching his brows and hands in
his perplexity; then takes the end chair from the luncheon table and
sits down beside her, saying, with a touching effort to be gentle and
patient)  Now, I think I have it.  At least I'll try.

GLORIA (firmly).  You see!  Everything comes right if we only think
it resolutely out.

CRAMPTON (in sudden dread).  No: don't think.  I want you to feel:
that's the only thing that can help us.  Listen!  Do you---but first---I
forgot.  What's your name?  I mean you pet name.  They can't very well
call you Sophronia.

GLORIA (with astonished disgust).  Sophronia!  My name is Gloria.  I
am always called by it.

CRAMPTON (his temper rising again).  Your name is Sophronia, girl:
you were called after your aunt Sophronia, my sister: she gave you your
first Bible with your name written in it.

GLORIA.  Then my mother gave me a new name.

CRAMPTON (angrily).  She had no right to do it.  I will not allow
this.

GLORIA.  You had no right to give me your sister's name.  I don't
know her.

CRAMPTON.  You're talking nonsense.  There are bounds to what I will
put up with.  I will not have it.  Do you hear that?

GLORIA (rising warningly).  Are you resolved to quarrel?

CRAMPTON (terrified, pleading).  No, no: sit down.  Sit down, won't
you?  (She looks at him, keeping him in suspense.  He forces himself to
utter the obnoxious name.)  Gloria.  (She marks her satisfaction with a
slight tightening of the lips, and sits down.)  There!  You see I only
want to shew you that I am your father, my---my dear child.  (The
endearment is so plaintively inept that she smiles in spite of herself,
and resigns herself to indulge him a little.)  Listen now.  What I want
to ask you is this.  Don't you remember me at all? You were only a tiny
child when you were taken away from me; but you took plenty of notice of
things.  Can't you remember someone whom you loved, or (shyly) at least
liked in a childish way?  Come! someone who let you stay in his study
and look at his toy boats, as you thought them?  (He looks anxiously
into her face for some response, and continues less hopefully and more
urgently)  Someone who let you do as you liked there and never said a
word to you except to tell you that you must sit still and not speak?
Someone who was something that no one else was to you---who was your
father.

GLORIA (unmoved).  If you describe things to me, no doubt I shall
presently imagine that I remember them.  But I really remember nothing.

CRAMPTON (wistfully).  Has your mother never told you anything about
me?

GLORIA.  She has never mentioned your name to me.  (He groans
involuntarily.  She looks at him rather contemptuously and continues)
Except once; and then she did remind me of something I had forgotten.

CRAMPTON (looking up hopefully).  What was that?

GLORIA (mercilessly).  The whip you bought to beat me with.

CRAMPTON (gnashing his teeth).  Oh!  To bring that up against me!  To
turn from me!  When you need never have known.  (Under a grinding,
agonized breath.)  Curse her!

GLORIA (springing up).  You wretch!  (With intense emphasis.)  You
wretch!!  You dare curse my mother!

CRAMPTON.  Stop; or you'll be sorry afterwards.  I'm your father.

GLORIA.  How I hate the name!  How I love the name of mother!  You
had better go.

CRAMPTON.  I---I'm choking.  You want to kill me.  Some---I--- (His
voice stifles: he is almost in a fit.)

GLORIA (going up to the balustrade with cool, quick resourcefulness,
and calling over to the beach).  Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE (answering from below).  Yes.

GLORIA.  Come here a moment, please.  Mr. Crampton wants you.  (She
returns to the table and pours out a glass of water.)

CRAMPTON (recovering his speech).  No: let me alone.  I don't want
him.  I'm all right, I tell you.  I need neither his help nor yours.
(He rises and pulls himself together.)  As you say, I had better go.
(He puts on his hat.)  Is that your last word?

GLORIA.  I hope so.  (He looks stubbornly at her for a moment; nods
grimly, as if he agreed to that; and goes into the hotel.  She looks at
him with equal steadiness until he disappears, when she makes a gesture
of relief, and turns to speak to Valentine, who comes running up the
steps.)

VALENTINE (panting).  What's the matter?  (Looking round.)  Where's
Crampton?

GLORIA.  Gone.  (Valentine's face lights up with sudden joy, dread,
and mischief.  He has just realized that he is alone with Gloria.  She
continues indifferently)  I thought he was ill; but he recovered
himself.  He wouldn't wait for you.  I am sorry.  (She goes for her book
and parasol.)

VALENTINE.  So much the better.  He gets on my nerves after a while.
(Pretending to forget himself.)  How could that man have so beautiful a
daughter!

GLORIA (taken aback for a moment; then answering him with polite but
intentional contempt).  That seems to be an attempt at what is called a
pretty speech.  Let me say at once, Mr. Valentine, that pretty speeches
make very sickly conversation.  Pray let us be friends, if we are to be
friends, in a sensible and wholesome way.  I have no intention of
getting married; and unless you are content to accept that state of
things, we had much better not cultivate each other's acquaintance.

VALENTINE (cautiously).  I see.  May I ask just this one question?
Is your objection an objection to marriage as an institution, or merely
an objection to marrying me personally?

GLORIA.  I do not know you well enough, Mr. Valentine, to have any
opinion on the subject of your personal merits.  (She turns away from
him with infinite indifference, and sits down with her book on the
garden seat.)  I do not think the conditions of marriage at present are
such as any self-respecting woman can accept.

VALENTINE (instantly changing his tone for one of cordial sincerity,
as if he frankly accepted her terms and was delighted and reassured by
her principles).  Oh, then that's a point of sympathy between us
already.  I quite agree with you: the conditions are most unfair.  (He
takes off his hat and throws it gaily on the iron table.)  No: what I
want is to get rid of all that nonsense.  (He sits down beside her, so
naturally that she does not think of objecting, and proceeds, with
enthusiasm)  Don't you think it a horrible thing that a man and a woman
can hardly know one another without being supposed to have designs of
that kind?  As if there were no other interests---no other subjects of
conversation---as if women were capable of nothing better!

GLORIA (interested). Ah, now you are beginning to talk humanly and
sensibly, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (with a gleam in his eye at the success of his hunter's
guile).  Of course!---two intelligent people like us.  Isn't it
pleasant, in this stupid, convention-ridden world, to meet with someone
on the same plane---someone with an unprejudiced, enlightened mind?

GLORIA (earnestly).  I hope to meet many such people in England.

VALENTINE (dubiously).  Hm!  There are a good many people here---
nearly forty millions.  They're not all consumptive members of the
highly educated classes like the people in Madeira.

GLORIA (now full of her subject).  Oh, everybody is stupid and
prejudiced in Madeira---weak, sentimental creatures!  I hate weakness;
and I hate sentiment.

VALENTINE.  That's what makes you so inspiring.

GLORIA (with a slight laugh).  Am I inspiring?

VALENTINE  Yes.  Strength's infectious.

GLORIA.  Weakness is, I know.

VALENTINE (with conviction).  Y o u're strong.  Do you know that you
changed the world for me this morning?  I was in the dumps, thinking of
my unpaid rent, frightened about the future.  When you came in, I was
dazzled.  (Her brow clouds a little.  He goes on quickly.)  That was
silly, of course; but really and truly something happened to me.
Explain it how you will, my blood got--- (he hesitates, trying to think
of a sufficiently unimpassioned word) ---oxygenated: my muscles braced;
my mind cleared; my courage rose.  That's odd, isn't it?  considering
that I am not at all a sentimental man.

GLORIA (uneasily, rising).  Let us go back to the beach.

VALENTINE (darkly---looking up at her).  What!  you feel it, too?

GLORIA.  Feel what?

VALENTINE.  Dread.

GLORIA.  Dread!

VALENTINE.  As if something were going to happen.  It came over me
suddenly just before you proposed that we should run away to the others.

GLORIA (amazed).  That's strange---very strange!  I had the same
presentiment.

VALENTINE.  How extraordinary!  (Rising.)  Well: shall we run away?

GLORIA.  Run away!  Oh, no: that would be childish.  (She sits down
again.  He resumes his seat beside her, and watches her with a gravely
sympathetic air.  She is thoughtful and a little troubled as she adds)
I wonder what is the scientific explanation of those fancies that cross
us occasionally!

VALENTINE.  Ah, I wonder!  It's a curiously helpless sensation: isn't
it?

GLORIA (rebelling against the word).  Helpless?

VALENTINE.  Yes.  As if Nature, after allowing us to belong to
ourselves and do what we judged right and reasonable for all these
years, were suddenly lifting her great hand to take us---her two little
children---by the scruff's of our little necks, and use us, in spite of
ourselves, for her own purposes, in her own way.

GLORIA.  Isn't that rather fanciful?

VALENTINE (with a new and startling transition to a tone of utter
recklessness).  I don't know.  I don't care.  (Bursting out
reproachfully.)  Oh, Miss Clandon, Miss Clandon: how could you?

GLORIA.  What have I done?

VALENTINE.  Thrown this enchantment on me.  I'm honestly trying to be
sensible---scientific---everything that you wish me to be.  But---but---
oh, don't you see what you have set to work in my imagination?

GLORIA (with indignant, scornful sternness).  I hope you are not
going to be so foolish---so vulgar---as to say love.

VALENTINE (with ironical haste to disclaim such a weakness).  No, no,
no.  Not love: we know better than that.  Let's call it chemistry.  You
can't deny that there is such a thing as chemical action, chemical
affinity, chemical combination---the most irresistible of all natural
forces.  Well, you're attracting me irresistibly---chemically.

GLORIA (contemptuously).  Nonsense!

VALENTINE.  Of course it's nonsense, you stupid girl.  (Gloria
recoils in outraged surprise.)  Yes, stupid girl:  t h a t's  a
scientific fact, anyhow.  You're a prig---a feminine prig: that's what
you are.  (Rising.)  Now I suppose you've done with me for ever.  (He
goes to the iron table and takes up his hat.)

GLORIA (with elaborate calm, sitting up like a High-school-mistress
posing to be photographed).  That shows how very little you understand
my real character.  I am not in the least offended.  (He pauses and puts
his hat down again.)  I am always willing to be told of my own defects,
Mr. Valentine, by my friends, even when they are as absurdly mistaken
about me as you are.  I have many faults---very serious faults---of
character and temper; but if there is one thing that I am not, it is
what you call a prig.  (She closes her lips trimly and looks steadily
and challengingly at him as she sits more collectedly than ever.)

VALENTINE (returning to the end of the garden seat to confront her
more emphatically).  Oh, yes, you are.  My reason tells me so: my
knowledge tells me so: my experience tells me so.

GLORIA.  Excuse my reminding you that your reason and your knowledge
and your experience are not infallible.  At least I hope not.

VALENTINE.  I must believe them.  Unless you wish me to believe my
eyes, my heart, my instincts, my imagination, which are all telling me
the most monstrous lies about you.

GLORIA (the collectedness beginning to relax).  Lies!

VALENTINE (obstinately).  Yes, lies.  (He sits down again beside
her.)  Do you expect me to believe that you are the most beautiful woman
in the world?

GLORIA.  That is ridiculous, and rather personal.

VALENTINE.  Of course it's ridiculous.  Well, that's what my eyes
tell me.  (Gloria makes a movement of contemptuous protest.)  No: I'm
not flattering.  I tell you I don't believe it.  (She is ashamed to find
that this does not quite please her either.)  Do you think that if you
were to turn away in disgust from my weakness, I should sit down here
and cry like a child?

GLORIA (beginning to find that she must speak shortly and pointedly
to keep her voice steady).  Why should you, pray?

VALENTINE (with a stir of feeling beginning to agitate his voice).
Of course not: I'm not such an idiot.  And yet my heart tells me I
should---my fool of a heart.  But I'll argue with my heart and bring it
to reason.  If I loved you a thousand times, I'll force myself to look
the truth steadily in the face.  After all, it's easy to be sensible:
the facts are the facts.  What's this place? it's not heaven: it's the
Marine Hotel.  What's the time? it's not eternity: it's about half past
one in the afternoon.  What am I? a dentist---a five shilling dentist!

GLORIA.  And I am a feminine prig.

VALENTINE. (passionately).  No, no: I can't face that: I must have
one illusion left---the illusion about you.  I love you.  (He turns
towards her as if the impulse to touch her were ungovernable: she rises
and stands on her guard wrathfully.  He springs up impatiently and
retreats a step.)  Oh, what a fool I am!---an idiot!  You don't
understand: I might as well talk to the stones on the beach.  (He turns
away, discouraged.)

GLORIA (reassured by his withdrawal, and a little remorseful).  I am
sorry.  I do not mean to be unsympathetic, Mr. Valentine; but what can I
say?

VALENTINE (returning to her with all his recklessness of manner
replaced by an engaging and chivalrous respect).  You can say nothing,
Miss Clandon.  I beg your pardon: it was my own fault, or rather my own
bad luck.  You see, it all depended on your naturally liking me.  (She
is about to speak: he stops her deprecatingly.)  Oh, I know you mustn't
tell me whether you like me or not; but---

GLORIA (her principles up in arms at once).  Must not!  Why not?  I
am a free woman: why should I not tell you?

VALENTINE (pleading in terror, and retreating).  Don't.  I'm afraid
to hear.

GLORIA (no longer scornful).  You need not be afraid.  I think you
are sentimental, and a little foolish; but I like you.

VALENTINE (dropping into the iron chair as if crushed).  Then it's
all over.  (He becomes the picture of despair.)

GLORIA (puzzled, approaching him).  But why?

VALENTINE.  Because liking is not enough.  Now that I think down into
it seriously, I don't know whether I like you or not.

GLORIA (looking down at him with wondering concern).  I'm sorry.

VALENTINE (in an agony of restrained passion).  Oh, don't pity me.
Your voice is tearing my heart to pieces.  Let me alone, Gloria.  You go
down into the very depths of me, troubling and stirring me---I can't
struggle with it---I can't tell you---

GLORIA (breaking down suddenly).  Oh, stop telling me what you feel:
I can't bear it.

VALENTINE (springing up triumphantly, the agonized voice now solid,
ringing, and jubilant).  Ah, it's come at last---my moment of courage.
(He seizes her hands: she looks at him in terror.)  Our moment of
courage!  (He draws her to him; kisses her with impetuous strength; and
laughs boyishly.)  Now you've done it, Gloria.  It's all over: we're in
love with one another.  (She can only gasp at him.)  But what a dragon
you were!  And how hideously afraid I was!

PHILIP'S VOICE (calling from the beach).  Valentine!

DOLLY'S VOICE.  Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE.  Good-bye.  Forgive me.  (He rapidly kisses her hands, and
runs away to the steps, where he meets Mrs. Clandon, ascending.  Gloria,
quite lost, can only start after him.)

MRS. CLANDON.  The children want you, Mr. Valentine.  (She looks
anxiously around.)  Is he gone?

VALENTINE (puzzled). He?  (Recollecting.)  Oh, Crampton.  Gone this
long time, Mrs. Clandon.  (He runs off buoyantly down the steps.)

GLORIA (sinking upon the seat). Mother!

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying to her in alarm).  What is it, dear?

GLORIA (with heartfelt, appealing reproach).  Why didn't you educate
me properly?

MRS. CLANDON (amazed).  My child: I did my best.

GLORIA.  Oh, you taught me nothing---nothing.

MRS. CLANDON.  What is the matter with you?

GLORIA (with the most intense expression).  Only shame---shame---
shame.  (Blushing unendurably, she covers her face with her hands and
turns away from her mother.)

END OF ACT II.



Act III


The Clandon's sitting room in the hotel.  An expensive apartment on
the ground floor, with a French window leading to the gardens.  In the
centre of the room is a substantial table, surrounded by chairs, and
draped with a maroon cloth on which opulently bound hotel and railway
guides are displayed.  A visitor entering through the window and coming
down to this central table would have the fireplace on his left, and a
writing table against the wall on his right, next the door, which is
further down.  He would, if his taste lay that way, admire the wall
decoration of Lincrusta Walton in plum color and bronze lacquer, with
dado and cornice; the ormolu consoles in the corners; the vases on
pillar pedestals of veined marble with bases of polished black wood, one
on each side of the window; the ornamental cabinet next the vase on the
side nearest the fireplace, its centre compartment closed by an inlaid
door, and its corners rounded off with curved panes of glass protecting
shelves of cheap blue and white pottery; the bamboo tea table, with
folding shelves, in the corresponding space on the other side of the
window; the pictures of ocean steamers and Landseer's dogs; the
saddlebag ottoman in line with the door but on the other side of the
room; the two comfortable seats of the same pattern on the hearthrug;
and finally, on turning round and looking up, the massive brass pole
above the window, sustaining a pair of maroon rep curtains with
decorated borders of staid green.  Altogether, a room well arranged to
flatter the occupant's sense of importance, and reconcile him to a
charge of a pound a day for its use.

Mrs. Clandon sits at the writing table, correcting proofs.  Gloria is
standing at the window, looking out in a tormented revery.

The clock on the mantelpiece strikes five with a sickly clink, the
bell being unable to bear up against the black marble cenotaph in which
it is immured.

MRS. CLANDON.  Five!  I don't think we need wait any longer for the
children.  The are sure to get tea somewhere.

GLORIA (wearily).  Shall I ring?

MRS. CLANDON.  Do, my dear.  (Gloria goes to the hearth and rings.)
I have finished these proofs at last, thank goodness!

GLORIA (strolling listlessly across the room and coming behind her
mother's chair).  What proofs?

MRS. CLANDON  The new edition of Twentieth Century Women.

GLORIA (with a bitter smile).  There's a chapter missing.

MRS. CLANDON (beginning to hunt among her proofs).  Is there?  Surely
not.

GLORIA.  I mean an unwritten one.  Perhaps I shall write it for you--
-when I know the end of it.  (She goes back to the window.)

MRS. CLANDON.  Gloria!  More enigmas!

GLORIA.  Oh, no.  The same enigma.

MRS. CLANDON (puzzled and rather troubled; after watching her for a
moment).  My dear.

GLORIA (returning).  Yes.

MRS. CLANDON.  You know I never ask questions.

GLORIA (kneeling beside her chair).  I know, I know.  (She suddenly
throws her arms about her mother and embraces her almost passionately.)

MRS. CLANDON. (gently, smiling but embarrassed).  My dear: you are
getting quite sentimental

GLORIA (recoiling).  Ah, no, no.  Oh, don't say that.  Oh!  (She
rises and turns away with a gesture as if tearing herself.)

MRS. CLANDON (mildly).  My dear: what is the matter?  What--- (The
waiter enters with the tea tray.)

WAITER (balmily).  This was what you rang for, ma'am, I hope?

MRS. CLANDON.  Thank you, yes.  (She turns her chair away from the
writing table, and sits down again.  Gloria crosses to the hearth and
sits crouching there with her face averted.)

WAITER (placing the tray temporarily on the centre table).  I thought
so, ma'am.  Curious how the nerves seem to give out in the afternoon
without a cup of tea.  (He fetches the tea table and places it in front
of Mrs. Cladon, conversing meanwhile.)  the young lady and gentleman
have just come back, ma'am: they have been out in a boat, ma'am.  Very
pleasant on a fine afternoon like this---very pleasant and invigorating
indeed.  (He takes the tray from the centre table and puts it on the tea
table.)  Mr. McComas will not come to tea, ma'am: he has gone to call
upon Mr. Crampton.  (He takes a couple of chairs and sets one at each
end of the tea table.)

GLORIA (looking round with an impulse of terror).  And the other
gentleman?

WAITER (reassuringly, as he unconsciously drops for a moment into the
measure of "I've been roaming," which he sang as a boy.)  Oh, he's
coming, miss, he's coming.  He has been rowing the boat, miss, and has
just run down the road to the chemist's for something to put on the
blisters.  But he will be here directly, miss---directly.  (Gloria, in
ungovernable apprehension, rises and hurries towards the door.)

MRS. CLANDON. (half rising).  Glo---  (Gloria goes out.  Mrs. Clandon
looks perplexedly at the waiter, whose composure is unruffled.)

WAITER (cheerfully).  Anything more, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON.  Nothing, thank you.

WAITER.  Thank you, ma'am.  (As he withdraws, Phil and Dolly, in the
highest spirits, come tearing in.  He holds the door open for them; then
goes out and closes it.)

DOLLY (ravenously).  Oh, give me some tea.  (Mrs. Clandon pours out a
cup for her.)  We've been out in a boat.  Valentine will be here
presently.

PHILIP.  He is unaccustomed to navigation.  Where's Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON (anxiously, as she pours out his tea).  Phil: there is
something the matter with Gloria.  Has anything happened?  (Phil and
Dolly look at one another and stifle a laugh.)  What is it?

PHILIP (sitting down on her left).  Romeo---

DOLLY (sitting down on her right).  ---and Juliet.

PHILIP (taking his cup of tea from Mrs. Clandon).  Yes, my dear
mother: the old, old story.  Dolly: don't take all the milk.
(He deftly takes the jug from her.)  Yes: in the spring---

DOLLY.  ---a young man's fancy---

PHILIP. ---lightly turns to---thank you (to Mrs. Clandon, who has
passed the biscuits) ---thoughts of love.  It also occurs in the autumn.
The young man in this case is---

DOLLY.  Valentine.

PHILIP.  And his fancy has turned to Gloria to the extent of---

DOLLY.   ---kissing her---

PHILIP.  ---on the terrace---

DOLLY (correcting him).  --on the lips, before everybody.

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously).  Phil!  Dolly!  Are you joking?  (They
shake their heads.)  Did she allow it?

PHILIP.  We waited to see him struck to earth by the lightning of her
scorn;---

DOLLY.  ---but he wasn't.

PHILIP.  She appeared to like it.

DOLLY.  As far as we could judge.  (Stopping Phil, who is about to
pour out another cup.)  No: you've sworn off two cups.

MRS. CLANDON (much troubled).  Children: you must not be here when
Mr. Valentine comes.  I must speak very seriously to him about this.

PHILIP.  To ask him his intentions?  What a violation of Twentieth
Century principles!

DOLLY.  Quite right, mamma: bring him to book.  Make the most of the
nineteenth century while it lasts.

PHILIP.  Sh!  Here he is.  (Valentine comes in.)

VALENTINE  Very sorry to be late for tea, Mrs. Clandon.  (She takes
up the tea-pot.)  No, thank you: I never take any.  No doubt Miss Dolly
and Phil have explained what happened to me.

PHILIP (momentously rising).  Yes, Valentine: we have explained.

DOLLY (significantly, also rising).  We have explained very
thoroughly.

PHILIP.  It was our duty.  (Very seriously.)  Come, Dolly.  (He
offers Dolly his arm, which she takes.  They look sadly at him, and go
out gravely, arm in arm.  Valentine stares after them, puzzled; then
looks at Mrs. Clandon for an explanation.)

MRS. CLANDON (rising and leaving the tea table).  Will you sit down,
Mr. Valentine.  I want to speak to you a little, if you will allow me.
(Valentine sits down slowly on the ottoman, his conscience presaging a
bad quarter of an hour.  Mrs. Clandon takes Phil's chair, and seats
herself deliberately at a convenient distance from him.)  I must begin
by throwing myself somewhat at your consideration.  I am going to speak
of a subject of which I know very little---perhaps nothing.  I mean
love.

VALENTINE.  Love!

MRS. CLANDON.  Yes, love.  Oh, you need not look so alarmed as that,
Mr. Valentine: I am not in love with you.

VALENTINE (overwhelmed).  Oh, really, Mrs.--- (Recovering himself.)
I should be only too proud if you were.

MRS. CLANDON.  Thank you, Mr. Valentine.  But I am too old to begin.

VALENTINE.  Begin!  Have you never---?

MRS. CLANDON.  Never.  My case is a very common one, Mr. Valentine.
I married before I was old enough to know what I was doing.  As you have
seen for yourself, the result was a bitter disappointment for both my
husband and myself.  So you see, though I am a married woman, I have
never been in love; I have never had a love affair; and to be quite
frank with you, Mr. Valentine, what I have seen of the love affairs of
other people has not led me to regret that deficiency in my experience.
(Valentine, looking very glum, glances sceptically at her, and says
nothing.  Her color rises a little; and she adds, with restrained anger)
You do not believe me?

VALENTINE (confused at having his thought read).  Oh, why not?  Why
not?

MRS. CLANDON.  Let me tell you, Mr. Valentine, that a life devoted to
the Cause of Humanity has enthusiasms and passions to offer which far
transcend the selfish personal infatuations and sentimentalities of
romance. Those are not your enthusiasms and passions, I take it?
(Valentine, quite aware that she despises him for it, answers in the
negative with a melancholy shake of the head.)  I thought not.  Well,
I am equally at a disadvantage in discussing those so-called affairs
of the heart in which you appear to be an expert.

VALENTINE (restlessly).  What are you driving at, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON.  I think you know.

VALENTINE.  Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON.  Yes.  Gloria.

VALENTINE (surrendering).  Well, yes: I'm in love with Gloria.
(Interposing as she is about to speak.)  I know what you're going to
say: I've no money.

MRS. CLANDON.  I care very little about money, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE.  Then you're very different to all the other mothers who
have interviewed me.

MRS. CLANDON.  Ah, now we are coming to it, Mr. Valentine.  You are
an old hand at this.  (He opens his mouth to protest: she cuts him short
with some indignation.)  Oh, do you think, little as I understand these
matters, that I have not common sense enough to know that a man who
could make as much way in one interview with such a woman as my
daughter, can hardly be a novice!

VALENTINE. I assure you---

MRS. CLANDON (stopping him).  I am not blaming you, Mr. Valentine.  It
is Gloria's business to take care of herself; and you have a right to
amuse yourself as you please.  But---

VALENTINE (protesting).  Amuse myself!  Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON (relentlessly).  On your honor, Mr. Valentine, are you
in earnest?

VALENTINE (desperately).  On my honor I am in earnest.  (She looks
searchingly at him.  His sense of humor gets the better of him; and he
adds quaintly)  Only, I always have been in earnest; and yet---here I
am, you see!

MRS. CLANDON.  This is just what I suspected.  (Severely.)  Mr.
Valentine: you are one of those men who play with women's affections.

VALENTINE.  Well, why not, if the Cause of Humanity is the only thing
worth being serious about?  However, I understand.  (Rising and taking
his hat with formal politeness.)  You wish me to discontinue my visits.

MRS. CLANDON.  No: I am sensible enough to be well aware that
Gloria's best chance of escape from you now is to become better
acquainted with you.

VALENTINE (unaffectedly alarmed).  Oh, don't say that, Mrs. Clandon.
You don't think that, do you?

MRS. CLANDON.  I have great faith, Mr. Valentine, in the sound
training Gloria's mind has had since she was a child.

VALENTINE (amazingly relieved).  O-oh!  Oh, that's all right.  (He
sits down again and throws his hat flippantly aside with the air of a
man who has no longer anything to fear.)

MRS. CLANDON (indignant at his assurance).  What do you mean?

VALENTINE (turning confidentially to her).  Come: shall I teach you
something, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON (stiffly).  I am always willing to learn.

VALENTINE.  Have you ever studied the subject of gunnery---artillery-
--cannons and war-ships and so on?

MRS. CLANDON.  Has gunnery anything to do with Gloria?

VALENTINE.  A great deal---by way of illustration.  During this whole
century, my dear Mrs. Clandon, the progress of artillery has been a duel
between the maker of cannons and the maker of armor plates to keep the
cannon balls out.  You build a ship proof against the best gun known:
somebody makes a better gun and sinks your ship.  You build a heavier
ship, proof against that gun: somebody makes a heavier gun and sinks you
again.  And so on.  Well, the duel of sex is just like that.

MRS. CLANDON.  The duel of sex!

VALENTINE.  Yes: you've heard of the duel of sex, haven't you?  Oh, I
forgot: you've been in Madeira: the expression has come up since your
time.  Need I explain it?

MRS. CLANDON (contemptuously).  No.

VALENTINE.  Of course not.  Now what happens in the duel of sex?  The
old fashioned mother received an old fashioned education to protect her
against the wiles of man.  Well, you know the result: the old fashioned
man got round her.  The old fashioned woman resolved to protect her
daughter more effectually---to find some armor too strong for the old
fashioned man.  So she gave her daughter a scientific education---your
plan.  That was a corker for the old fashioned man: he said it wasn't
fair---unwomanly and all the rest of it.  But that didn't do him any
good.  So he had to give up his old fashioned plan of attack---you know-
--going down on his knees and swearing to love, honor and obey, and so
on.

MRS. CLANDON.  Excuse me: that was what the woman swore.

VALENTINE.  Was it?  Ah, perhaps you're right---yes: of course it
was.  Well, what did the man do?  Just what the artillery man does---
went one better than the woman---educated himself scientifically and
beat her at that game just as he had beaten her at the old game.  I
learnt how to circumvent the Women's Rights woman before I was twenty-
three: it's all been found out long ago.  You see, my methods are
thoroughly modern.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet disgust).  No doubt.

VALENTINE.  But for that very reason there's one sort of girl against
whom they are of no use.

MRS. CLANDON.  Pray which sort?

VALENTINE.  The thoroughly old fashioned girl.  If you had brought up
Gloria in the old way, it would have taken me eighteen months to get to
the point I got to this afternoon in eighteen minutes.  Yes, Mrs.
Clandon: the Higher Education of Women delivered Gloria into my hands;
and it was you who taught her to believe in the Higher Education of
Women.

MRS. CLANDON (rising).  Mr. Valentine: you are very clever.

VALENTINE (rising also).  Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON  And you have taught me  n o t h i n g.  Good-bye.

VALENTINE (horrified).  Good-bye!  Oh, mayn't I see her before I go?

MRS. CLANDON.  I am afraid she will not return until you have gone
Mr. Valentine.  She left the room expressly to avoid you.

VALENTINE (thoughtfully).  That's a good sign.  Good-bye.  (He bows
and makes for the door, apparently well satisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON (alarmed).  Why do you think it a good sign?

VALENTINE (turning near the door).  Because I am mortally afraid of
her; and it looks as if she were mortally afraid of me.  (He turns to go
and finds himself face to face with Gloria, who has just entered.  She
looks steadfastly at him.  He stares helplessly at her; then round at
Mrs. Clandon; then at Gloria again, completely at a loss.)

GLORIA (white, and controlling herself with difficulty).  Mother: is
what Dolly told me true?

MRS. CLANDON.  What did she tell you, dear?

GLORIA.  That you have been speaking about me to this gentleman.

VALENTINE (murmuring).  This gentleman!  Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (sharply).  Mr. Valentine: can you hold your tongue for
a moment?  (He looks piteously at them; then, with a despairing shrug,
goes  back to the ottoman and throws his hat on it.)

GLORIA (confronting her mother, with deep reproach).  Mother: what
right had you to do it?

MRS. CLANDON.  I don't think I have said anything I have no right to
say, Gloria.

VALENTINE (confirming her officiously).  Nothing.  Nothing whatever.
(Gloria looks at him with unspeakable indignation.)  I beg your pardon.
(He sits down ignominiously on the ottoman.)

GLORIA.  I cannot believe that any one has any right even to think
about things that concern me only.  (She turns away from them to conceal
a painful struggle with her emotion.)

MRS. CLANDON.  My dear, if I have wounded your pride---

GLORIA (turning on them for a moment).  My  p r i d e!  My pride!!
Oh, it's gone: I have learnt now that I have no strength to be proud of.
(Turning away again.)  But if a woman cannot protect herself, no one can
protect her.  No one has any right to try---not even her mother.  I know
I have lost your confidence, just as I have lost this man's respect;---
(She stops to master a sob.)

VALENTINE (under his breath).  This man!  (Murmuring again.)  Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (in an undertone).  Pray be silent, sir.

GLORIA (continuing).  ---but I have at least the right to be left
alone in my disgrace.  I am one of those weak creatures born to be
mastered by the first man whose eye is caught by them; and I must
fulfill my destiny, I suppose.  At least spare me the humiliation of
trying to save me.  (She sits down, with her handkerchief to her eyes,
at the farther end of the table.)

VALENTINE (jumping up).  Look here---

MRS. CLANDON.  Mr. Va---

VALENTINE (recklessly).  No: I will speak: I've been silent for
nearly thirty seconds.  (He goes up to Gloria.)  Miss Clandon---

GLORIA (bitterly).  Oh, not Miss Clandon: you have found that it is
quite safe to call me Gloria.

VALENTINE.  No, I won't: you'll throw it in my teeth afterwards and
accuse me of disrespect.  I say it's a heartbreaking falsehood that I
don't respect you.  It's true that I didn't respect your old pride: why
should I?  It was nothing but cowardice.  I didn't respect your
intellect: I've a better one myself: it's a masculine specialty.  But
when the depths stirred!---when my moment came!---when you made me
brave!---ah, then, then, t h e n!

GLORIA.  Then you respected me, I suppose.

VALENTINE.  No, I didn't: I adored you.  (She rises quickly and turns
her back on him.)  And you can never take that moment away from me.  So
now I don't care what happens.  (He comes down the room addressing a
cheerful explanation to nobody in particular.)  I'm perfectly aware that
I'm talking nonsense.  I can't help it.  (To Mrs. Clandon.)  I love
Gloria; and there's an end of it.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically).  Mr. Valentine: you are a most dangerous
man.  Gloria: come here.  (Gloria, wondering a little at the command,
obeys, and stands, with drooping head, on her mother's right hand,
Valentine being on the opposite side.  Mrs. Clandon then begins, with
intense scorn.)  Ask this man whom you have inspired and made brave, how
many women have inspired him before (Gloria looks up suddenly with a
flash of jealous anger and amazement); how many times he has laid the
trap in which he has caught you; how often he has baited it with the
same speeches; how much practice it has taken to make him perfect in his
chosen part in life as the Duellist of Sex.

VALENTINE.  This isn't fair.  You're abusing my confidence, Mrs.
Clandon.

MRS. CLANDON.  Ask him, Gloria.

GLORIA (in a flush of rage, going over to him with her fists
clenched).  Is that true?

VALENTINE.  Don't be angry---

GLORIA (interrupting him implacably).  Is it true?  Did you ever say
that before?  Did you ever feel that before---for another woman?

VALENTINE (bluntly).  Yes.  (Gloria raises her clenched hands.)

MRS. CLANDON (horrified, springing to her side and catching her
uplifted arm).  Gloria!!  My dear!  You're forgetting yourself.
(Gloria, with a deep expiration, slowly relaxes her threatening
attitude.)

VALENTINE.  Remember: a man's power of love and admiration is like
any other of his powers: he has to throw it away many times before he
learns what is really worthy of it.

MRS. CLANDON.  Another of the old speeches, Gloria.  Take care.

VALENTINE (remonstrating).  Oh!

GLORIA (to Mrs. Clandon, with contemptuous self-possession).  Do you
think I need to be warned now?  (To Valentine.)  You have tried to make
me love you.

VALENTINE.  I have.

GLORIA.  Well, you have succeeded in making me hate you---
passionately.

VALENTINE (philosophically).  It's surprising how little difference
there is between the two.  (Gloria turns indignantly away from him.  He
continues, to Mrs. Clandon)  I know men whose wives love them; and they
go on exactly like that.

MRS. CLANDON.  Excuse me, Mr. Valentine; but had you not better go?

GLORIA.  You need not send him away on my account, mother.  He is
nothing to me now; and he will amuse Dolly and Phil.  (She sits down
with slighting indifference, at the end of the table nearest the
window.)

VALENTINE (gaily).  Of course: that's the sensible way of looking at
it.  Come, Mrs. Clandon: you can't quarrel with a mere butterfly like
me.

MRS. CLANDON.  I very greatly mistrust you, Mr. Valentine.  But I do
not like to think that your unfortunate levity of disposition is mere
shamelessness and worthlessness;---

GLORIA (to herself, but aloud).  It is shameless; and it is
worthless.

MRS. CLANDON.  ---so perhaps we had better send for Phil and Dolly
and allow you to end your visit in the ordinary way.

VALENTINE (as if she had paid him the highest compliment).  You
overwhelm me, Mrs. Clandon.  Thank you.  (The waiter enters.)

WAITER.  Mr. McComas, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON.  Oh, certainly.  Bring him in.

WAITER.  He wishes to see you in the reception-room, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON.  Why not here?

WAITER.  Well, if you will excuse my mentioning it, ma'am, I think
Mr. McComas feels that he would get fairer play if he could speak to you
away from the younger members of your family, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON.  Tell him they are not here.

WAITER.  They are within sight of the door, ma'am; and very watchful,
for some reason or other.

MRS. CLANDON (going).  Oh, very well: I'll go to him.

WAITER (holding the door open for her).  Thank you, ma'am.  (She goes
out.  He comes back into the room, and meets the eye of Valentine, who
wants him to go.)  All right, sir.  Only the tea-things, sir.  (Taking
the tray.)  Excuse me, sir.  Thank you sir.  (He goes out.)

VALENTINE (to Gloria).  Look here.  You will forgive me, sooner or
later.  Forgive me now.

GLORIA (rising to level the declaration more intensely at him).
Never!  While grass grows or water runs, never, never, never!!!

VALENTINE (unabashed).  Well, I don't care.  I can't be unhappy about
anything.  I shall never be unhappy again, never, never, never, while
grass grows or water runs.  The thought of you will always make me wild
with joy.  (Some quick taunt is on her lips: he interposes swiftly.)
No: I never said that before: that's new.

GLORIA.  It will not be new when you say it to the next woman.

VALENTINE.  Oh, don't, Gloria, don't.  (He kneels at her feet.)

GLORIA.  Get up.  Get up!  How dare you?  (Phil and Dolly, racing, as
usual, for first place, burst into the room.  They check themselves on
seeing what is passing.  Valentine springs up.)

PHILIP (discreetly).  I beg your pardon.  Come, Dolly.  (He turns to
go.)

GLORIA (annoyed).  Mother will be back in a moment, Phil.
(Severely.)  Please wait here for her.  (She turns away to the window,
where she stands looking out with her back to them.)

PHILIP (significantly).  Oh, indeed.  Hmhm!

DOLLY.  Ahah!

PHILIP.  You seem in excellent spirits, Valentine.

VALENTINE.  I am.  (Comes between them.)  Now look here.  You both
know what's going on, don't you?  (Gloria turns quickly, as if
anticipating some fresh outrage.)

DOLLY.  Perfectly.

VALENTINE.  Well, it's all over.  I've been refused---scorned.  I'm
only here on sufferance.  You understand: it's all over.  Your sister is
in no sense entertaining my addresses, or condescending to interest
herself in me in any way.  (Gloria, satisfied, turns back contemptuously
to the window.)  Is that clear?

DOLLY.  Serve you right.  You were in too great a hurry.

PHILIP (patting him on the shoulder).  Never mind: you'd never have
been able to call your soul your own if she'd married you.  You can now
begin a new chapter in your life.

DOLLY.  Chapter seventeen or thereabouts, I should imagine.

VALENTINE (much put out by this pleasantry).  No: don't say things
like that.  That's just the sort of thoughtless remark that makes a lot
of mischief.

DOLLY.  Oh, indeed.  Hmhm!

PHILIP.  Ahah!  (He goes to the hearth and plants himself there in
his best head-of-the-family attitude.)

McComas, looking very serious, comes in quickly with Mrs. Clandon,
whose first anxiety is about Gloria.  She looks round to see where she
is, and is going to join her at the window when Gloria comes down to
meet her with a marked air of trust and affection.  Finally, Mrs.
Clandon takes her former seat, and Gloria posts herself behind it.
McComas, on his way to the ottoman, is hailed by Dolly.

DOLLY.  What cheer, Finch?

McCOMAS (sternly).  Very serious news from your father, Miss Clandon.
Very serious news indeed.  (He crosses to the ottoman, and sits down.
Dolly, looking deeply impressed, follows him and sits beside him on his
right.)

VALENTINE.  Perhaps I had better go.

McCOMAS.  By no means, Mr. Valentine.  You are deeply concerned in
this.  (Valentine takes a chair from the table and sits astride of it,
leaning over the back, near the ottoman.)  Mrs. Clandon: your husband
demands the custody of his two younger children, who are not of age.
(Mrs. Clandon, in quick alarm, looks instinctively to see if Dolly is
safe.)

DOLLY (touched).  Oh, how nice of him!  He likes us, mamma.

McCOMAS.  I am sorry to have to disabuse you of any such idea, Miss
Dorothea.

DOLLY (cooing ecstatically).  Dorothee-ee-ee-a!  (Nestling against
his shoulder, quite overcome.)  Oh, Finch!

McCOMAS (nervously, moving away).  No, no, no, no!

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  D e a r e s t  Dolly!  (To McComas.)
The deed of separation gives me the custody of the children.

McCOMAS.  It also contains a covenant that you are not to approach or
molest him in any way.

MRS. CLANDON.  Well, have I done so?

McCOMAS.  Whether the behavior of your younger children amounts to
legal molestation is a question on which it may be necessary to take
counsel's opinion.  At all events, Mr. Crampton not only claims to have
been molested; but he believes that he was brought here by a plot in
which Mr. Valentine acted as your agent.

VALENTINE.  What's that?  Eh?

McCOMAS.  He alleges that you drugged him, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE.  So I did.  (They are astonished.)

McCOMAS.  But what did you do that for?

DOLLY.  Five shillings extra.

McCOMAS (to Dolly, short-temperedly).  I must really ask you, Miss
Clandon, not to interrupt this very serious conversation with irrelevant
interjections.  (Vehemently.)  I insist on having earnest matters
earnestly and reverently discussed.  (This outburst produces an
apologetic silence, and puts McComas himself out of countenance.  He
coughs, and starts afresh, addressing himself to Gloria.)  Miss Clandon:
it is my duty to tell you that your father has also persuaded himself
that Mr. Valentine wishes to marry you---

VALENTINE (interposing adroitly).  I do.

McCOMAS (offended).  In that case, sir, you must not be surprised to
find yourself regarded by the young lady's father as a fortune hunter.

VALENTINE.  So I am.  Do you expect my wife to live on what I earn?
ten-pence a week!

McCOMAS (revolted).  I have nothing more to say, sir.  I shall return
and tell Mr. Crampton that this family is no place for a father.  (He
makes for the door.)

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet authority).  Finch!  (He halts.)  If Mr.
Valentine cannot be serious, you can.  Sit down.  (McComas, after a
brief struggle between his dignity and his friendship, succumbs, seating
himself this time midway between Dolly and Mrs. Clandon.)  You know that
all this is a made up case---that Fergus does not believe in it any more
than you do.  Now give me your real advice---your sincere, friendly
advice: you know I have always trusted your judgment.  I promise you the
children will be quiet.

McCOMAS (resigning himself).  Well, well!  What I want to say is
this.  In the old arrangement with your husband, Mrs. Clandon, you had
him at a terrible disadvantage.

MRS. CLANDON.  How so, pray?

McCOMAS.  Well, you were an advanced woman, accustomed to defy public
opinion, and with no regard for what the world might say of you.

MRS. CLANDON (proud of it).  Yes: that is true.  (Gloria, behind the
chair, stoops and kisses her mother's hair, a demonstration which
disconcerts her extremely.)

McCOMAS.  On the other hand, Mrs. Clandon, your husband had a great
horror of anything getting into the papers.  There was his business to
be considered, as well as the prejudices of an old-fashioned family.

MRS. CLANDON.  Not to mention his own prejudices.

McCOMAS.  Now no doubt he behaved badly, Mrs. Clandon---

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully).  No doubt.

McCOMAS.  But was it altogether his fault?

MRS. CLANDON.  Was it mine?

McCOMAS (hastily).  No.  Of course not.

GLORIA (observing him attentively).  You do not mean that, Mr.
McComas.

McCOMAS.  My dear young lady, you pick me up very sharply.  But let
me just put this to you.  When a man makes an unsuitable marriage
(nobody's fault, you know, but purely accidental incompatibility of
tastes); when he is deprived by that misfortune of the domestic sympathy
which, I take it, is what a man marries for; when in short, his wife is
rather worse than no wife at all (through no fault of his own, of
course), is it to be wondered at if he makes matters worse at first by
blaming her, and even, in his desperation, by occasionally drinking
himself into a violent condition or seeking sympathy elsewhere?

MRS. CLANDON.  I did not blame him: I simply rescued myself and the
children from him.

McCOMAS.  Yes: but you made hard terms, Mrs. Clandon.  You had him at
your mercy: you brought him to his knees when you threatened to make the
matter public by applying to the Courts for a judicial separation.
Suppose he had had that power over you, and used it to take your
children away from you and bring them up in ignorance of your very name,
how would you feel? what would you do?  Well, won't you make some
allowance for his feelings?---in common humanity.

MRS. CLANDON.  I never discovered his feelings.  I discovered his
temper, and his--- (she shivers) the rest of his common humanity.

McCOMAS (wistfully).  Women can be very hard, Mrs. Clandon.

VALENTINE.  That's true.

GLORIA (angrily).  Be silent.  (He subsides.)

McCOMAS (rallying all his forces).  Let me make one last appeal.
Mrs. Clandon: believe me, there are men who have a good deal of feeling,
and kind feeling, too, which they are not able to express.  What you
miss in Crampton is that mere veneer of civilization, the art of shewing
worthless attentions and paying insincere compliments in a kindly,
charming way.  If you lived in London, where the whole system is one of
false good-fellowship, and you may know a man for twenty years without
finding out that he hates you like poison, you would soon have your eyes
opened.  There we do unkind things in a kind way: we say bitter things
in a sweet voice: we always give our friends chloroform when we tear
them to pieces.  But think of the other side of it!  Think of the people
who do kind things in an unkind way---people whose touch hurts, whose
voices jar, whose tempers play them false, who wound and worry the
people they love in the very act of trying to conciliate them, and yet
who need affection as much as the rest of us.  Crampton has an
abominable temper, I admit.  He has no manners, no tact, no grace.
He'll never be able to gain anyone's affection unless they will take his
desire for it on trust.  Is he to have none---not even pity---from his
own flesh and blood?

DOLLY (quite melted).  Oh, how beautiful, Finch!  How nice of you!

PHILIP (with conviction).  Finch: this is eloquence---positive
eloquence.

DOLLY.  Oh, mamma, let us give him another chance.  Let us have him
to dinner.

MRS. CLANDON (unmoved).  No, Dolly: I hardly got any lunch.  My dear
Finch: there is not the least use in talking to me about Fergus.  You
have never been married to him: I have.

McCOMAS (to Gloria).   Miss Clandon: I have hitherto refrained from
appealing to you, because, if what Mr. Crampton told me to be true, you
have been more merciless even than your mother.

GLORIA (defiantly).  You appeal from her strength to my weakness!

McCOMAS.  Not your weakness, Miss Clandon.  I appeal from her
intellect to your heart.

GLORIA.  I have learnt to mistrust my heart.  (With an angry glance
at Valentine.)  I would tear my heart and throw it away if I could.  My
answer to you is my mother's answer.  (She goes to Mrs. Clandon, and
stands with her arm about her; but Mrs. Clandon, unable to endure this
sort of demonstrativeness, disengages herself as soon as she can without
hurting Gloria's feelings.)

McCOMAS (defeated).  Well, I am very sorry---very sorry.  I have done
my best.  (He rises and prepares to go, deeply dissatisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON.  But what did you expect, Finch?  What do you want us
to do?

McCOMAS.  The first step for both you and Crampton is to obtain
counsel's opinion as to whether he is bound by the deed of separation or
not.  Now why not obtain this opinion at once, and have a friendly
meeting (her face hardens)---or shall we say a neutral meeting? ---to
settle the difficulty---here---in this hotel---to-night?  What do you
say?

MRS. CLANDON.  But where is the counsel's opinion to come from?

McCOMAS.  It has dropped down on us out of the clouds.  On my way
back here from Crampton's I met a most eminent Q.C., a man whom I
briefed in the case that made his name for him.  He has come down here
from Saturday to Monday for the sea air, and to visit a relative of his
who lives here.  He has been good enough to say that if I can arrange a
meeting of the parties he will come and help us with his opinion.  Now
do let us seize this chance of a quiet friendly family adjustment.  Let
me bring my friend here and try to persuade Crampton to come, too.
Come: consent.

MRS. CLANDON (rather ominously, after a moment's consideration).
Finch: I don't want counsel's opinion, because I intend to be guided by
my own opinion.  I don't want to meet Fergus again, because I don't like
him, and don't believe the meeting will do any good.  However (rising),
you have persuaded the children that he is not quite hopeless.  Do as
you please.

McCOMAS (taking her hand and shaking it).  Thank you, Mrs. Clandon.
Will nine o'clock suit you?

MRS. CLANDON.  Perfectly.  Phil: will you ring, please.  (Phil rings
the bell.)  But if I am to be accused of conspiring with Mr. Valentine,
I think he had better be present.

VALENTINE (rising).  I quite agree with you.  I think it's most
important.

McCOMAS.  There can be no objection to that, I think.  I have the
greatest hopes of a happy settlement.  Good-bye for the present.  (He
goes out, meeting the waiter; who holds the door for him to pass
through.)

MRS. CLANDON.  We expect some visitors at nine, William.  Can we have
dinner at seven instead of half-past?

WAITER (at the door).  Seven, ma'am?  Certainly, ma'am.  It will be a
convenience to us this busy evening, ma'am.  There will be the band and
the arranging of the fairy lights and one thing or another, ma'am.

DOLLY.  The fairy lights!

PHILIP.  The band!  William: what mean you?

WAITER.  The fancy ball, miss---

DOLLY and PHILIP (simultaneously rushing to him).  Fancy ball!

WAITER.  Oh, yes, sir.  Given by the regatta committee for the
benefit of the Life-boat, sir.  (To Mrs. Clandon.)  We often have them,
ma'am: Chinese lanterns in the garden, ma'am: very bright and pleasant,
very gay and innocent indeed.  (To Phil.)  Tickets downstairs at the
office, sir, five shillings: ladies half price if accompanied by a
gentleman.

PHILIP (seizing his arm to drag him off).  To the office, William!

DOLLY (breathlessly, seizing his other arm).  Quick, before they're
all sold.  (They rush him out of the room between them.)

MRS. CLANDON.  What on earth are they going to do?  (Going out.)  I
really must go and stop this---  (She follows them, speaking as she
disappears.  Gloria stares coolly at Valentine, and then deliberately
looks at her watch.)

VALENTINE.  I understand.  I've stayed too long.  I'm going.

GLORIA (with disdainful punctiliousness).  I owe you some apology,
Mr. Valentine.  I am conscious of having spoken somewhat sharply---
perhaps rudely---to you.

VALENTINE.  Not at all.

GLORIA.  My only excuse is that it is very difficult to give
consideration and respect when there is no dignity of character on the
other side to command it.

VALENTINE (prosaically).  How is a man to look dignified when he's
infatuated?

GLORIA (effectually unstilted).  Don't say those things to me.  I
forbid you.  They are insults.

VALENTINE.  No: they're only follies.  I can't help them.

GLORIA.  If you were really in love, it would not make you foolish:
it would give you dignity---earnestness---even beauty.

VALENTINE.  Do you really think it would make me beautiful?  (She
turns her back on him with the coldest contempt.)  Ah, you see you're
not in earnest.  Love can't give any man new gifts.  It can only
heighten the gifts he was born with.

GLORIA (sweeping round at him again).  What gifts were you born with,
pray?

VALENTINE.  Lightness of heart.

GLORIA.  And lightness of head, and lightness of faith, and lightness
of everything that makes a man.

VALENTINE.  Yes, the whole world is like a feather dancing in the
light now; and Gloria is the sun.  (She rears her head angrily.)  I beg
your pardon: I'm off.  Back at nine.  Good-bye.  (He runs off gaily,
leaving her standing in the middle of the room staring after him.)

END OF ACT III


Act IV


The same room.  Nine o'clock.  Nobody present.  The lamps are
lighted; but the curtains are not drawn.  The window stands wide open;
and strings of Chinese lanterns are glowing among the trees outside,
with the starry sky beyond.  The band is playing dance-music in the
garden, drowning the sound of the sea.

The waiter enters, shewing in Crampton and McComas.  Crampton looks
cowed and anxious.  He sits down wearily and timidly on the ottoman.

WAITER.  The ladies have gone for a turn through the grounds to see
the fancy dresses, sir.  If you will be so good as to take seats,
gentlemen, I shall tell them.  (He is about to go into the garden
through the window when McComas stops him.)

McCOMAS.  One moment.  If another gentleman comes, shew him in
without any delay: we are expecting him.

WAITER.  Right, sir.  What name, sir?

McCOMAS.  Boon.  Mr. Boon.  He is a stranger to Mrs. Clandon; so he
may give you a card.  If so, the name is spelt B.O.H.U.N.  You will not
forget.

WAITER (smiling).  You may depend on me for that, sir.  My own name
is Boon, sir, though I am best known down here as Balmy Walters, sir.
By rights I should spell it with the aitch you, sir; but I think it best
not to take that liberty, sir.  There is Norman blood in it, sir; and
Norman blood is not a recommendation to a waiter.

McCOMAS.  Well, well: "True hearts are more than coronets, and simple
faith than Norman blood."

WAITER.  That depends a good deal on one's station in life, sir.  If
you were a waiter, sir, you'd find that simple faith would leave you
just as short as Norman blood.  I find it best to spell myself B.
double-O.N., and to keep my wits pretty sharp about me.  But I'm taking
up your time, sir.  You'll excuse me, sir: your own fault for being so
affable, sir.  I'll tell the ladies you're here, sir.  (He goes out into
the garden through the window.)

McCOMAS.  Crampton: I can depend on you, can't I?

CRAMPTON.  Yes, yes.  I'll be quiet.  I'll be patient.  I'll do my
best.

McCOMAS.  Remember: I've not given you away.  I've told them it was
all their fault.

CRAMPTON.  You told me that it was all my fault.

McCOMAS.  I told you the truth.

CRAMPTON (plaintively).  If they will only be fair to me!

McCOMAS.  My dear Crampton, they won't be fair to you: it's not to be
expected from them at their age.  If you're going to make impossible
conditions of this kind, we may as well go back home at once.

CRAMPTON.  But surely I have a right---

McCOMAS (intolerantly).  You won't get your rights.  Now, once for
all, Crampton, did your promises of good behavior only mean that you
won't complain if there's nothing to complain of?  Because, if so---
(He moves as if to go.)

CRAMPTON (miserably).  No, no: let me alone, can't you?  I've been
bullied enough: I've been tormented enough.  I tell you I'll do my
best.  But if that girl begins to talk to me like that and to look at
me like---  (He breaks off and buries his head in his hands.)

McCOMAS (relenting).  There, there: it'll be all right, if you will
only bear and forbear.  Come, pull yourself together: there's someone
coming.  (Crampton, too dejected to care much, hardly changes his
attitude.  Gloria enters from the garden; McComas goes to meet her at
the window; so that he can speak to her without being heard by
Crampton.)  There he is, Miss Clandon.  Be kind to him.  I'll leave you
with him for a moment.  (He goes into the garden.  Gloria comes in and
strolls coolly down the middle of the room.)

CRAMPTON (looking round in alarm).  Where's McComas?

GLORIA (listlessly, but not unsympathetically).  Gone out---to leave
us together.  Delicacy on his part, I suppose.  (She stops beside him
and looks quaintly down at him.)  Well, father?

CRAMPTON (a quaint jocosity breaking through his forlornness).  Well,
daughter?  (They look at one another for a moment, with a melancholy
sense of humor.)

GLORIA.  Shake hands.  (They shake hands.)

CRAMPTON (holding her hand).  My dear: I'm afraid I spoke very
improperly of your mother this afternoon.

GLORIA.  Oh, don't apologize.  I was very high and mighty myself; but
I've come down since: oh, yes: I've been brought down.  (She sits on the
floor beside his chair.)

CRAMPTON.  What has happened to you, my child?

GLORIA.  Oh, never mind.  I was playing the part of my mother's
daughter then; but I'm not: I'm my father's daughter.  (Looking at him
funnily.)  That's a come down, isn't it?

CRAMPTON (angry).  What!  (Her odd expression does not alter.  He
surrenders.)  Well, yes, my dear: I suppose it is, I suppose it is.
(She nods sympathetically.)  I'm afraid I'm sometimes a little
irritable; but I know what's right and reasonable all the time, even
when I don't act on it.  Can you believe that?

GLORIA.  Believe it!  Why, that's myself---myself all over.  I know
what's right and dignified and strong and noble, just as well as she
does; but oh, the things I do! the things I do! the things I let other
people do!!

CRAMPTON (a little grudgingly in spite of himself).  As well as she
does?  You mean your mother?

GLORIA (quickly).  Yes, mother.  (She turns to him on her knees and
seizes his hands.)  Now listen.  No treason to her: no word, no thought
against her.  She is our superior---yours and mine---high heavens above
us.  Is that agreed?

CRAMPTON.  Yes, yes.  Just as you please, my dear.

GLORIA (not satisfied, letting go his hands and drawing back from
him).  You don't like her?

CRAMPTON.  My child: you haven't been married to her.  I have.  (She
raises herself slowly to her feet, looking at him with growing
coldness.)  She did me a great wrong in marrying me without really
caring for me.  But after that, the wrong was all on my side,
I dare say.  (He offers her his hand again.)

GLORIA (taking it firmly and warningly).  Take care.  That's a
dangerous subject.  My feelings---my miserable, cowardly, womanly
feelings---may be on your side; but my conscience is on hers.

CRAMPTON.  I'm very well content with that division, my dear.  Thank
you.  (Valentine arrives.  Gloria immediately becomes deliberately
haughty.)

VALENTINE.  Excuse me; but it's impossible to find a servant to
announce one: even the never failing William seems to be at the ball.  I
should have gone myself; only I haven't five shillings to buy a ticket.
How are you getting on, Crampton?  Better, eh?

CRAMPTON.  I am myself again, Mr. Valentine, no thanks to you.

VALENTINE.  Look at this ungrateful parent of yours, Miss Clandon!  I
saved him from an excruciating pang; and he reviles me!

GLORIA (coldly).  I am sorry my mother is not here to receive you,
Mr. Valentine.  It is not quite nine o'clock; and the gentleman of whom
Mr. McComas spoke, the lawyer, is not yet come.

VALENTINE.  Oh, yes, he is.  I've met him and talked to him.  (With
gay malice.)  You'll like him, Miss Clandon: he's the very incarnation
of intellect.  You can hear his mind working.

GLORIA (ignoring the jibe).  Where is he?

VALENTINE.  Bought a false nose and gone into the fancy ball.

CRAMPTON (crustily, looking at his watch).  It seems that everybody
has gone to this fancy ball instead of keeping to our appointment here.

VALENTINE.  Oh, he'll come all right enough: that was half an hour
ago.  I didn't like to borrow five shillings from him and go in with
him; so I joined the mob and looked through the railings until Miss
Clandon disappeared into the hotel through the window.

GLORIA.  So it has come to this, that you follow me about in public
to stare at me.

VALENTINE.  Yes: somebody ought to chain me up.

Gloria turns her back on him and goes to the fireplace.  He takes the
snub very philosophically, and goes to the opposite side of the room.
The waiter appears at the window, ushering in Mrs. Clandon and McComas.

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying in).  I am so sorry to have kept you waiting.

A grotesquely majestic stranger, in a domino and false nose, with
goggles, appears at the window.

WAITER (to the stranger).  Beg pardon, sir; but this is a private
apartment, sir.  If you will allow me, sir, I will shew you to the
American bar and supper rooms, sir.  This way, sir.

He goes into the gardens, leading the way under the impression that
the stranger is following him.  The majestic one, however, comes
straight into the room to the end of the table, where, with impressive
deliberation, he takes off the false nose and then the domino, rolling
up the nose into the domino  and throwing the bundle on the table like a
champion throwing down his glove.  He is now seen to be a stout, tall
man between forty and fifty, clean shaven, with a midnight oil pallor
emphasized by stiff black hair, cropped short and oiled, and eyebrows
like early Victorian horsehair upholstery.  Physically and spiritually,
a coarsened man: in cunning and logic, a ruthlessly sharpened one.  His
bearing as he enters is sufficiently imposing and disquieting; but when
he speaks, his powerful, menacing voice, impressively articulated
speech, strong inexorable manner, and a terrifying power of intensely
critical listening raise the impression produced by him to absolute
tremendousness.

THE STRANGER.  My name is Bohun.  (General awe.)  Have I the honor of
addressing Mrs. Clandon?  (Mrs. Clandon bows.  Bohun bows.)  Miss
Clandon?  (Gloria bows.  Bohun bows.)  Mr. Clandon?

CRAMPTON (insisting on his rightful name as angrily as he dares).  My
name is Crampton, sir.

BOHUN.  Oh, indeed.  (Passing him over without further notice and
turning to Valentine.)  Are you Mr. Clandon?

VALENTINE (making it a point of honor not to be impressed by him).
Do I look like it?  My name is Valentine.  I did the drugging.

BOHUN.  Ah, quite so.  Then Mr. Clandon has not yet arrived?

WAITER (entering anxiously through the window).  Beg pardon, ma'am;
but can you tell me what became of that--- (He recognizes Bohun, and
loses all his self-possession.  Bohun waits rigidly for him to pull
himself together.  After a pathetic exhibition of confusion, he recovers
himself sufficiently to address Bohun weakly but coherently.)  Beg
pardon, sir, I'm sure, sir.  Was---was it you, sir?

BOHUN (ruthlessly).  It was I.

WAITER (brokenly).  Yes, sir.  (Unable to restrain his tears.)  You
in a false nose, Walter!  (He sinks faintly into a chair at the table.)
I beg pardon, ma'am, I'm sure.  A little giddiness---

BOHUN (commandingly).  You will excuse him, Mrs. Clandon, when I
inform you that he is my father.

WAITER (heartbroken).  Oh, no, no, Walter.  A waiter for your father
on the top of a false nose!  What will they think of you?

MRS. CLANDON (going to the waiter's chair in her kindest manner).  I
am delighted to hear it, Mr. Bohun.  Your father has been an excellent
friend to us since we came here.  (Bohun bows gravely.)

WAITER (shaking his head).  Oh, no, ma'am.  It's very kind of you---
very ladylike and affable indeed, ma'am; but I should feel at a great
disadvantage off my own proper footing.  Never mind my being the
gentleman's father, ma'am: it is only the accident of birth after all,
ma'am.  (He gets up feebly.)  You'll all excuse me, I'm sure, having
interrupted your business.  (He begins to make his way along the table,
supporting himself from chair to chair, with his eye on the door.)

BOHUN.  One moment.  (The waiter stops, with a sinking heart.)  My
father was a witness of what passed to-day, was he not, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON.  Yes, most of it, I think.

BOHUN.  In that case we shall want him.

WAITER (pleading).  I hope it may not be necessary, sir.  Busy
evening for me, sir, with that ball: very busy evening indeed, sir.

BOHUN (inexorably).  We shall want you.

MRS. CLANDON (politely).  Sit down, won't you?

WAITER (earnestly).  Oh, if you please, ma'am, I really must draw the
line at sitting down.  I couldn't let myself be seen doing such a thing,
ma'am: thank you, I am sure, all the same.  (He looks round from face to
face wretchedly, with an expression that would melt a heart of stone.)

GLORIA.  Don't let us waste time.  William only wants to go on taking
care of us.  I should like a cup of coffee.

WAITER (brightening perceptibly).  Coffee, miss?  (He gives a little
gasp of hope.)  Certainly, miss.  Thank you, miss: very timely, miss,
very thoughtful and considerate indeed.  (To Mrs. Clandon, timidly but
expectantly.)  Anything for you, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON  Er---oh, yes: it's so hot, I think we might have a jug
of claret cup.

WAITER (beaming).  Claret cup, ma'am!  Certainly, ma'am.

GLORIA  Oh, well I'll have a claret cup instead of coffee.  Put some
cucumber in it.

WAITER (delighted).  Cucumber, miss!  yes, miss.  (To Bohun.)
Anything special for you, sir?  You don't like cucumber, sir.

BOHUN.  If Mrs. Clandon will allow me---syphon---Scotch.

WAITER.  Right, sir.  (To Crampton.)  Irish for you, sir, I think,
sir?  (Crampton assents with a grunt.  The waiter looks enquiringly at
Valentine.)

VALENTINE.  I like the cucumber.

WAITER.  Right, sir.  (Summing up.)  Claret cup, syphon, one Scotch
and one Irish?

MRS. CLANDON.  I think that's right.

WAITER (perfectly happy).  Right, ma'am.  Directly, ma'am.  Thank
you.  (He ambles off through the window, having sounded the whole gamut
of human happiness, from the bottom to the top, in a little over two
minutes.)

McCOMAS.  We can begin now, I suppose?

BOHUN.  We had better wait until Mrs. Clandon's husband arrives.

CRAMPTON.  What d'y' mean?  I'm her husband.

BOHUN (instantly pouncing on the inconsistency between this and his
previous statement).  You said just now your name was Crampton.

CRAMPTON.  So it is.

MRS. CLANDON } (all four    { I---

GLORIA       }  speaking    { My---

McCOMAS      }  simul-      { Mrs.---

VALENTINE    }  taneously). { You---

BOHUN (drowning them in two thunderous words).  One moment.  (Dead
silence.)  Pray allow me.  Sit down everybody.  (They obey humbly.
Gloria takes the saddle-bag chair on the hearth.  Valentine slips around
to her side of the room and sits on the ottoman facing the window, so
that he can look at her.  Crampton sits on the ottoman with his back to
Valentine's.  Mrs. Clandon, who has all along kept at the opposite side
of the room in order to avoid Crampton as much as possible, sits near
the door, with McComas beside her on her left.  Bohun places himself
magisterially in the centre of the group, near the corner of the table
on Mrs. Clandon's side.  When they are settled, he fixes Crampton with
his eye, and begins.)  In this family, it appears, the husband's name is
Crampton: the wife's Clandon.  Thus we have on the very threshold of the
case an element of confusion.

VALENTINE (getting up and speaking across to him with one knee on the
ottoman).  But it's perfectly simple.

BOHUN (annihilating him with a vocal thunderbolt).  It is.  Mrs.
Clandon has adopted another name.  That is the obvious explanation which
you feared I could not find out for myself.  You mistrust my
intelligence, Mr. Valentine--- (Stopping him as he is about to protest.)
No: I don't want you to answer that: I want you to think over it when
you feel your next impulse to interrupt me.

VALENTINE (dazed).  This is simply breaking a butterfly on a wheel.
What does it matter?  (He sits down again.)

BOHUN.  I will tell you what it matters, sir.  It matters that if
this family difference is to be smoothed over as we all hope it may be,
Mrs. Clandon, as a matter of social convenience and decency, will have
to resume her husband's name.  (Mrs. Clandon assumes an expression of
the most determined obstinacy.)  Or else Mr. Crampton will have to call
himself Mr. Clandon.  (Crampton looks indomitably resolved to do nothing
of the sort.)  No doubt you think that an easy matter, Mr. Valentine.
(He looks pointedly at Mrs. Clandon, then at Crampton.)  I differ from
you.  (He throws himself back in his chair, frowning heavily.)

McCOMAS (timidly).  I think, Bohun, we had perhaps better dispose of
the important questions first.

BOHUN.  McComas: there will be no difficulty about the important
questions.  There never is.  It is the trifles that will wreck you at
the harbor mouth.  (McComas looks as if he considered this a paradox.)
You don't agree with me, eh?

McCOMAS (flatteringly).  If I did---

BOHUN (interrupting him).  If you did, you would be me, instead of
being what you are.

McCOMAS (fawning on him).  Of course, Bohun, your specialty---

BOHUN (again interrupting him).  My specialty is being right when
other people are wrong.  If you agreed with me I should be of no use
here.  (He nods at him to drive the point home; then turns suddenly and
forcibly on Crampton.)  Now you, Mr. Crampton: what point in this
business have you most at heart?

CRAMPTON (beginning slowly).  I wish to put all considerations of
self aside in this matter---

BOHUN (interrupting him).  So do we all, Mr. Crampton.  (To Mrs.
Clandon.)  Y o u  wish to put self aside, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON.  Yes: I am not consulting my own feelings in being
here.

BOHUN.  So do you, Miss Clandon?

GLORIA.  Yes.

BOHUN.  I thought so.  We all do.

VALENTINE.  Except me.  My aims are selfish.

BOHUN.  That's because you think an impression of sincerity will
produce a better effect on Miss Clandon than an impression of
disinterestedness.  (Valentine, utterly dismantled and destroyed by this
just remark, takes refuge in a feeble, speechless smile.  Bohun,
satisfied at having now effectually crushed all rebellion, throws
himself back in his chair, with an air of being prepared to listen
tolerantly to their grievances.)  Now, Mr. Crampton, go on.  It's
understood that self is put aside.  Human nature always begins by saying
that.

CRAMPTON.  But I mean it, sir.

BOHUN.  Quite so.  Now for your point.

CRAMPTON.  Every reasonable person will admit that it's an unselfish
one---the children.

BOHUN.   Well?  What about the children?

CRAMPTON (with emotion).  They have---

BOHUN (pouncing forward again).  Stop.  You're going to tell me about
your feelings, Mr. Crampton.  Don't: I sympathize with them; but they're
not my business.  Tell us exactly what you want: that's what we have to
get at.

CRAMPTON (uneasily).  It's a very difficult question to answer, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN.  Come: I'll help you out.  What do you object to in the
present circumstances of the children?

CRAMPTON.  I object to the way they have been brought up.

BOHUN.  How do you propose to alter that now?

CRAMPTON.  I think they ought to dress more quietly.

VALENTINE.  Nonsense.

BOHUN (instantly flinging himself back in his chair, outraged by the
interruption).  When you are done, Mr. Valentine---when you are quite
done.

VALENTINE.  What's wrong with Miss Clandon's dress?

CRAMPTON (hotly to Valentine).  My opinion is as good as yours.

GLORIA (warningly).  Father!

CRAMPTON (subsiding piteously).  I didn't mean you, my dear.
(Pleading earnestly to Bohun.)  But the two younger ones! you have not
seen them, Mr. Bohun; and indeed I think you would agree with me that
there is something very noticeable, something almost gay and frivolous
in their style of dressing.

MRS. CLANDON (impatiently).  Do you suppose I choose their clothes
for them?  Really this is childish.

CRAMPTON (furious, rising).  Childish!  (Mrs. Clandon rises
indignantly.)

McCOMAS   } (all ris-   } Crampton, you promised---

VALENTINE }  ing and    } Ridiculous.  They dress

          }  speaking   }   charmingly.

GLORIA    }  together). } Pray let us behave reasonably.

Tumult.  Suddenly they hear a chime of glasses in the room behind
them.  They turn in silent surprise and find that the waiter has just
come back from the bar in the garden, and is jingling his tray warningly
as he comes softly to the table with it.

WAITER (to Crampton, setting a tumbler apart on the table).  Irish
for you, sir.  (Crampton sits down a little shamefacedly.  The waiter
sets another tumbler and a syphon apart, saying to Bohun) Scotch and
syphon for you, sir.  (Bohun waves his hand impatiently.  The waiter
places a large glass jug in the middle.)  And claret cup.  (All subside
into their seats.  Peace reigns.)

MRS. CLANDON (humbly to Bohun).  I am afraid we interrupted you, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN (calmly).  You did.  (To the waiter, who is going out.)  Just
wait a bit.

WAITER.  Yes, sir.  Certainly, sir.  (He takes his stand behind
Bohun's chair.)

MRS. CLANDON (to the waiter).  You don't mind our detaining you, I
hope.  Mr. Bohun wishes it.

WAITER (now quite at his ease).  Oh, no, ma'am, not at all, ma'am.
It is a pleasure to me to watch the working of his trained and powerful
mind---very stimulating, very entertaining and instructive indeed,
ma'am.

BOHUN (resuming command of the proceedings).  Now, Mr. Crampton: we
are waiting for you.  Do you give up your objection to the dressing, or
do you stick to it?

CRAMPTON (pleading).  Mr. Bohun: consider my position for a moment.
I haven't got myself alone to consider: there's my sister Sophronia and
my brother-in-law and all their circle.  They have a great horror of
anything that is at all---at all---well---

BOHUN.  Out with it.  Fast?  Loud?  Gay?

CRAMPTON.  Not in any unprincipled sense of course; but---but---
(blurting it out desperately) those two children would shock them.
They're not fit to mix with their own people.  That's what I complain
of.

MRS. CLANDON (with suppressed impatience).  Mr. Valentine: do you
think there is anything fast or loud about Phil and Dolly?

VALENTINE.  Certainly not.  It's utter bosh.  Nothing can be in
better taste.

CRAMPTON.  Oh, yes: of course you say so.

MRS. CLANDON.  William: you see a great deal of good English society.
Are my children overdressed?

WAITER (reassuringly).  Oh, dear, no, ma'am.  (Persuasively.)  Oh,
no, sir, not at all.  A little pretty and tasty no doubt; but very
choice and classy---very genteel and high toned indeed.  Might be the
son and daughter of a Dean, sir, I assure you, sir.  You have only to
look at them, sir, to--- (At this moment a harlequin and columbine,
dancing to the music of the band in the garden, which has just reached
the coda of a waltz, whirl one another into the room.  The harlequin's
dress is made of lozenges, an inch square, of turquoise blue silk and
gold alternately.  His hat is gilt and his mask turned up.  The
columbine's petticoats are the epitome of a harvest field, golden orange
and poppy crimson, with a tiny velvet jacket for the poppy stamens.
They pass, an exquisite and dazzling apparition, between McComas and
Bohun, and then back in a circle to the end of the table, where, as the
final chord of the waltz is struck, they make a tableau in the middle of
the company, the harlequin down on his left knee, and the columbine
standing on his right knee, with her arms curved over her head.  Unlike
their dancing, which is charmingly graceful, their attitudinizing is
hardly a success, and threatens to end in a catastrophe.)

THE COLUMBINE (screaming).  Lift me down, somebody: I'm going to
fall.  Papa: lift me down.

CRAMPTON (anxiously running to her and taking her hands).  My child!

DOLLY (jumping down with his help).  Thanks: so nice of you.  (Phil,
putting his hat into his belt, sits on the side of the table and pours
out some claret cup.  Crampton returns to his place on the ottoman in
great perplexity.)  Oh, what fun!  Oh, dear.  (She seats herself with a
vault on the front edge of the table, panting.)  Oh, claret cup!  (She
drinks.)

BOHUN (in powerful tones).  This is the younger lady, is it?

DOLLY (slipping down off the table in alarm at his formidable voice
and manner).  Yes, sir.  Please, who are you?

MRS. CLANDON.  This is Mr. Bohun, Dolly, who has very kindly come to
help us this evening.

DOLLY.  Oh, then he comes as a boon and a blessing---

PHILIP.  Sh!

CRAMPTON.  Mr. Bohun---McComas: I appeal to you.  Is this right?
Would you blame my sister's family for objecting to this?

DOLLY (flushing ominously).  Have you begun again?

CRAMPTON (propitiating her).  No, no.  It's perhaps natural at your
age.

DOLLY (obstinately).  Never mind my age.  Is it pretty?

CRAMPTON.  Yes, dear, yes.  (He sits down in token of submission.)

DOLLY (following him insistently).  Do you like it?

CRAMPTON.  My child: how can you expect me to like it or to approve
of it?

DOLLY (determined not to let him off).  How can you think it pretty
and not like it?

McCOMAS (rising, angry and scandalized).  Really I must say---
(Bohun, who has listened to Dolly with the highest approval, is down on
him instantly.)

BOHUN.  No: don't interrupt, McComas.  The young lady's method is
right.  (To Dolly, with tremendous emphasis.)  Press your questions,
Miss Clandon: press your questions.

DOLLY (rising).  Oh, dear, you are a regular overwhelmer!  Do you
always go on like this?

BOHUN (rising).  Yes.  Don't you try to put me out of countenance,
young lady:  you're too young to do it.  (He takes McComas's chair from
beside Mrs. Clandon's and sets it beside his own.)  Sit down.  (Dolly,
fascinated, obeys; and Bohun sits down again.  McComas, robbed of his
seat, takes a chair on the other side between the table and the
ottoman.)  Now, Mr. Crampton, the facts are before you---both of them.
You think you'd like to have your two youngest children to live with
you.  Well, you wouldn't--- (Crampton tries to protest; but Bohun will
not have it on any terms.)  No, you wouldn't: you think you would; but
I know better than you.  You'd want this young lady here to give up
dressing like a stage columbine in the evening and like a fashionable
columbine in the morning.  Well, she won't---never.  She thinks she
will; but---

DOLLY (interrupting him).  No I don't.  (Resolutely.)  I'll
n e v e r  give up dressing prettily.  Never.  As Gloria said to that
man in Madeira, never, never, never while grass grows or water runs.

VALENTINE (rising in the wildest agitation).  What!  What!
(Beginning to speak very fast.)  When did she say that?  Who did she say
that to?

BOHUN (throwing himself back with massive, pitying remonstrance).
Mr. Valentine---

VALENTINE (pepperily).  Don't you interrupt me, sir: this is
something really serious.  I  i n s i s t  on knowing who Miss Clandon
said that to.

DOLLY.  Perhaps Phil remembers.  Which was it, Phil? number three or
number five?

VALENTINE.  Number five!!!

PHILIP.  Courage, Valentine.  It wasn't number five: it was only a
tame naval lieutenant that was always on hand---the most patient and
harmless of mortals.

GLORIA (coldly).  What are we discussing now, pray?

VALENTINE (very red).  Excuse me: I am sorry I interrupted.  I shall
intrude no further, Mrs. Clandon.  (He bows to Mrs. Clandon and marches
away into the garden, boiling with suppressed rage.)

DOLLY.  Hmhm!

PHILIP.  Ahah!

GLORIA. Please go on, Mr. Bohun.

DOLLY (striking in as Bohun, frowning formidably, collects himself
for a fresh grapple with the case).  You're going to bully us, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN.  I---

DOLLY (interrupting him).  Oh, yes, you are: you think you're not;
but you are.  I know by your eyebrows.

BOHUN (capitulating).  Mrs. Clandon: these are clever children---
clear headed, well brought up children.  I make that admission
deliberately.  Can you, in return, point out to me any way of inducting
them to hold their tongues?

MRS. CLANDON.  Dolly, dearest---!

PHILIP.  Our old failing, Dolly.  Silence!  (Dolly holds her mouth.)

MRS. CLANDON.  Now, Mr. Bohun, before they begin again---

WAITER (softer).  Be quick, sir: be quick.

DOLLY (beaming at him).  Dear William!

PHILIP.  Sh!

BOHUN (unexpectedly beginning by hurling a question straight at
Dolly).  Have you any intention of getting married?

DOLLY.  I!  Well, Finch calls me by my Christian name.

McCOMAS.  I will not have this.  Mr. Bohun: I use the young lady's
Christian name naturally as an old friend of her mother's.

DOLLY.  Yes, you call me Dolly as an old friend of my mother's.  But
what about Dorothee-ee-a?  (McComas rises indignantly.)

CRAMPTON (anxiously, rising to restrain him).  Keep your temper,
McComas.  Don't let us quarrel.  Be patient.

McCOMAS.  I will not be patient.  You are shewing the most wretched
weakness of character, Crampton.  I say this is monstrous.

DOLLY.  Mr. Bohun: please bully Finch for us.

BOHUN.  I will.  McComas: you're making yourself ridiculous.  Sit
down.

McCOMAS.  I---

BOHUN (waving him down imperiously).  No: sit down, sit down.
(McComas sits down sulkily; and Crampton, much relieved, follows his
example.)

DOLLY (to Bohun, meekly).  Thank you.

BOHUN.  Now, listen to me, all of you.  I give no opinion, McComas,
as to how far you may or may not have committed yourself in the
direction indicated by this young lady.  (McComas is about to protest.)
No: don't interrupt me: if she doesn't marry you she will marry somebody
else.  That is the solution of the difficulty as to her not bearing her
father's name.  The other lady intends to get married.

GLORIA (flushing).  Mr. Bohun!

BOHUN.  Oh, yes, you do: you don't know it; but you do.

GLORIA (rising).  Stop.  I warn you, Mr. Bohun, not to answer for my
intentions.

BOHUN (rising).  It's no  use, Miss Clandon: you can't put me down.
I tell you your name will soon be neither Clandon nor Crampton; and I
could tell you what it will be if I chose.  (He goes to the other end of
the table, where he unrolls his domino, and puts the false nose on the
table.  When he moves they all rise; and Phil goes to the window.
Bohun, with a gesture, summons the waiter to help him in robing.)  Mr.
Crampton: your notion of going to law is all nonsense: your children
will be of age before you could get the point decided.  (Allowing the
waiter to put the domino on his shoulders.)  You can do nothing but make
a friendly arrangement.  If you want your family more than they want
you, you'll get the worse of the arrangement: if they want you more than
you want them, you'll get the better of it.  (He shakes the domino into
becoming folds and takes up the false nose.  Dolly gazes admiringly at
him.)  The strength of their position lies in their being very agreeable
people personally.  The strength of your position lies in your income.
(He claps on the false nose, and is again grotesquely transfigured.)

DOLLY (running to him).  Oh, now you look quite like a human being.
Mayn't I have just one dance with you?  C a n  you dance?  (Phil,
resuming his part of harlequin, waves his hat as if casting a spell on
them.)

BOHUN (thunderously).  Yes: you think I can't; but I can.  Come
along.  (He seizes her and dances off with her through the window in a
most powerful manner, but with studied propriety and grace.  The waiter
is meanwhile busy putting the chairs back in their customary places.)

PHILIP.  "On with the dance: let joy be unconfined."  William!

WAITER.  Yes, sir.

PHILIP.  Can you procure a couple of dominos and false noses for my
father and Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS.  Most certainly not.  I protest---

CRAMPTON.  No, no.  What harm will it do, just for once, McComas?
Don't let us be spoil-sports.

McCOMAS.  Crampton: you are not the man I took you for.  (Pointedly.)
Bullies are always cowards.  (He goes disgustedly towards the window.)

CRAMPTON (following him).  Well, never mind.  We must indulge them a
little.  Can you get us something to wear, waiter?

WAITER.  Certainly, sir.  (He precedes them to the window, and stands
aside there to let them pass out before him.)  This way, sir.  Dominos
and noses, sir?

McCOMAS (angrily, on his way out).  I shall wear my own nose.

WAITER (suavely).  Oh, dear, yes, sir: the false one will fit over it
quite easily, sir: plenty of room, sir, plenty of room.  (He goes out
after McComas.)

CRAMPTON (turning at the window to Phil with an attempt at genial
fatherliness).  Come along, my boy, come along.  (He goes.)

PHILIP (cheerily, following him).  Coming, dad, coming.  (On the
window threshold, he stops; looking after Crampton; then turns
fantastically with his bat bent into a halo round his head, and says
with a lowered voice to Mrs. Clandon and Gloria)  Did you feel the
pathos of that?  (He vanishes.)

MRS. CLANDON (left alone with Gloria).  Why did Mr. Valentine go away
so suddenly, I wonder?

GLORIA (petulantly).  I don't know.  Yes, I   d o   know.  Let us go
and see the dancing.  (They go towards the window, and are met by
Valentine, who comes in from the garden walking quickly, with his face
set and sulky.)

VALENTINE (stiffly).  Excuse me.  I thought the party had quite
broken up.

GLORIA (nagging).  Then why did you come back?

VALENTINE.  I came back because I am penniless.  I can't get out that
way without a five shilling ticket.

MRS. CLANDON.  Has anything annoyed you, Mr. Valentine?

GLORIA.  Never mind him, mother.  This is a fresh insult to me: that
is all.

MRS. CLANDON (hardly able to realize that Gloria is deliberately
provoking an altercation).  Gloria!

VALENTINE.  Mrs. Clandon: have I said anything insulting?  Have I
done anything insulting?

GLORIA.  you have implied that my past has been like yours.  That is
the worst of insults.

VALENTINE.  I imply nothing of the sort.  I declare that my past has
been blameless in comparison with yours.

MRS. CLANDON (most indignantly).  Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE.  Well, what am I to think when I learn that Miss Clandon
has made exactly the same speeches to other men that she has made to
me---when I hear of at least five former lovers, with a tame naval
lieutenant thrown in?  Oh, it's too bad.

MRS. CLANDON.  But you surely do not believe that these affairs---
mere jokes of the children's---were serious, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE.  Not to you---not to her, perhaps.  But I know what the
men felt.  (With ludicrously genuine earnestness.)  Have you ever
thought of the wrecked lives, the marriages contracted in the
recklessness of despair, the suicides, the---the---the---

GLORIA (interrupting him contemptuously).  Mother: this man is a
sentimental idiot.  (She sweeps away to the fireplace.)

MRS. CLANDON (shocked).  Oh, my  d e a r e s t  Gloria, Mr. Valentine
will think that rude.

VALENTINE.  I am not a sentimental idiot.  I am cured of sentiment
for ever.  (He sits down in dudgeon.)

MRS. CLANDON.  Mr. Valentine: you must excuse us all.  Women have to
unlearn the false good manners of their slavery before they acquire the
genuine good manners of their freedom.  Don't think Gloria vulgar
(Gloria turns, astonished): she is not really so.

GLORIA.  Mother!  You apologize for me to  h i m!

MRS. CLANDON.  My dear: you have some of the faults of youth as well
as its qualities; and Mr. Valentine seems rather too old fashioned in
his ideas about his own sex to like being called an idiot.  And now had
we not better go and see what Dolly is doing?  (She goes towards the
window.  Valentine rises.)

GLORIA.  Do you go, mother.  I wish to speak to Mr. Valentine alone.

MRS. CLANDON (startled into a remonstrance).  My dear!  (Recollecting
herself.)  I beg your pardon, Gloria.  Certainly, if you wish.  (She
bows to Valentine and goes out.)

VALENTINE.  Oh, if your mother were only a widow!  She's worth six of
you.

GLORIA.  That is the first thing I have heard you say that does you
honor.

VALENTINE.  Stuff!  Come: say what you want to say and let me go.

GLORIA.  I have only this to say.  You dragged me down to your level
for a moment this afternoon.  Do you think, if that had ever happened
before, that I should not have been on my guard---that I should not have
known what was coming, and known my own miserable weakness?

VALENTINE (scolding at her passionately).  Don't talk of it in that
way.  What do I care for anything in you but your weakness, as you call
it?  You thought yourself very safe, didn't you, behind your advanced
ideas!  I amused myself by upsetting  t h e m  pretty easily.

GLORIA (insolently, feeling that now she can do as she likes with
him).  Indeed!

VALENTINE.  But why did I do it?  Because I was being tempted to
awaken your heart---to stir the depths in you.  Why was I tempted?
Because Nature was in deadly earnest with me when I was in jest with
her.  When the great moment came, who was awakened? who was stirred? in
whom did the depths break up?  In myself--- m y s e l f: I was
transported: you were only offended---shocked.  You were only an
ordinary young lady, too ordinary to allow tame lieutenants to go as far
as I went.  That's all.  I shall not trouble you with conventional
apologies.  Good-bye.  (He makes resolutely for the door.)

GLORIA.  Stop.  (He hesitates.)  Oh, will you understand, if I tell
you the truth, that I am not making an advance to you?

VALENTINE.  Pooh!  I know what you're going to say.  You think you're
not ordinary---that I was right---that you really have those depths in
your nature.  It flatters you to believe it.  (She recoils.)  Well, I
grant that you are not ordinary in some ways: you are a clever girl
(Gloria stifles an exclamation of rage, and takes a threatening step
towards him); but you've not been awakened yet.  You didn't care: you
don't care.  It was my tragedy, not yours.  Good-bye.  (He turns to the
door.  She watches him, appalled to see him slipping from her grasp.  As
he turns the handle, he pauses; then turns again to her, offering his
hand.)  Let us part kindly.

GLORIA (enormously relieved, and immediately turning her back on him
deliberately.)  Good-bye.  I trust you will soon recover from the wound.

VALENTINE (brightening up as it flashes on him that he is master of
the situation after all).  I shall recover: such wounds heal more than
they harm.  After all, I still have my own Gloria.

GLORIA (facing him quickly).  What do you mean?

VALENTINE.  The Gloria of my imagination.

GLORIA (proudly).  Keep your own Gloria---the Gloria of your
imagination.  (Her emotion begins to break through her pride.)  The real
Gloria---the Gloria who was shocked, offended, horrified---oh, yes,
quite truly---who was driven almost mad with shame by the feeling that
all her power over herself had been broken down at her first real
encounter with---with--- (The color rushes over her face again.  She
covers it with her left hand, and puts her right on his left arm to
support herself.)

VALENTINE.  Take care.  I'm losing my senses again.  (Summoning all
her courage, she takes away her hand from her face and puts it on his
right shoulder, turning him towards her and looking him straight in the
eyes.  He begins to protest agitatedly.)  Gloria: be sensible: it's no
use: I haven't a penny in the world.

GLORIA.  Can't you earn one?  Other people do.

VALENTINE (half delighted, half frightened).  I never could---you'd
be unhappy---  My dearest love: I should be the merest fortune-hunting
adventurer if--- (Her grip on his arms tightens; and she kisses him.)
Oh, Lord!  (Breathless.)  Oh, I---  (He gasps.)  I don't know anything
about women: twelve years' experience is not enough.  (In a gust of
jealousy she throws him away from her; and he reels her back into the
chair like a leaf before the wind, as Dolly dances in, waltzing with the
waiter, followed by Mrs. Clandon and Finch, also waltzing, and Phil
pirouetting by himself.)

DOLLY (sinking on the chair at the writing-table).  Oh, I'm out of
breath.  How beautifully you waltz, William!

MRS. CLANDON (sinking on the saddlebag seat on the hearth).  Oh, how
could you make me do such a silly thing, Finch!  I haven't danced since
the soiree at South Place twenty years ago.

GLORIA (peremptorily at Valentine).  Get up.  (Valentine gets up
abjectly.)  Now let us have no false delicacy.  Tell my mother that we
have agreed to marry one another.  (A silence of stupefaction ensues.
Valentine, dumb with panic, looks at them with an obvious impulse to run
away.)

DOLLY (breaking the silence).  Number Six!

PHILIP.  Sh!

DOLLY (tumultuously).  Oh, my feelings!  I want to kiss somebody; and
we bar it in the family.  Where's Finch?

McCOMAS (starting violently).  No, positively--- (Crampton appears in
the window.)

DOLLY (running to Crampton).  Oh, you're just in time.  (She kisses
him.)  Now (leading him forward) bless them.

GLORIA.  No.  I will have no such thing, even in jest.  When I need a
blessing, I shall ask my mother's.

CRAMPTON (to Gloria, with deep disappointment).  Am I to understand
that you have engaged yourself to this young gentleman?

GLORIA (resolutely).  Yes.  Do you intend to be our friend or---

DOLLY (interposing).  ---or our father?

CRAMPTON.  I should like to be both, my child.  But surely---!  Mr.
Valentine: I appeal to your sense of honor.

VALENTINE.  You're quite right.  It's perfect madness.  If we go out
to dance together I shall have to borrow five shillings from her for a
ticket.  Gloria: don't be rash: you're throwing yourself away.  I'd much
better clear straight out of this, and never see any of you again.  I
shan't commit suicide: I shan't even be unhappy.  It'll be a relief to
me: I---I'm frightened, I'm positively frightened; and that's the plain
truth.

GLORIA (determinedly).  You shall not go.

VALENTINE (quailing).  No, dearest: of course not.  But--oh, will
somebody only talk sense for a moment and bring us all to reason!  I
can't.  Where's Bohun?  Bohun's the man.  Phil: go and summon Bohun---

PHILIP.  From the vastly deep.  I go.  (He makes his bat quiver in
the air and darts away through the window.)

WAITER (harmoniously to Valentine).  If you will excuse my putting in
a word, sir, do not let a matter of five shillings stand between you and
your happiness, sir.  We shall be only too pleased to put the ticket
down to you: and you can settle at your convenience.  Very glad to meet
you in any way, very happy and pleased indeed, sir.

PHILIP (re-appearing).  He comes.  (He waves his bat over the window.
Bohun comes in, taking off his false nose and throwing it on the table
in passing as he comes between Gloria and Valentine.)

VALENTINE.  The point is, Mr. Bohun---

McCOMAS (interrupting from the hearthrug).  Excuse me, sir: the point
must be put to him by a solicitor.  The question is one of an engagement
between these two young people.  The lady has some property, and
(looking at Crampton) will probably have a good deal more.

CRAMPTON.  Possibly.  I hope so.

VALENTINE.  And the gentleman hasn't a rap.

BOHUN (nailing Valentine to the point instantly).  Then insist on a
settlement.  That shocks your delicacy: most sensible precautions do.
But you ask my advice; and I give it to you.  Have a settlement.

GLORIA (proudly).  He shall have a settlement.

VALENTINE.  My good sir, I don't want advice for myself.  Give  h e r
some advice.

BOHUN.  She won't take it.  When you're married, she won't take yours
either--- (turning suddenly on Gloria) oh, no, you won't: you think you
will; but you won't.  He'll set to work and earn his living--- (turning
suddenly to Valentine) oh, yes, you will: you think you won't; but you
will.  She'll make you.

CRAMPTON (only half persuaded).  Then, Mr. Bohun, you don't think
this match an unwise one?

BOHUN.  Yes, I do: all matches are unwise.  It's unwise to be born;
it's unwise to be married; it's unwise to live; and it's unwise to die.

WAITER (insinuating himself between Crampton and Valentine).  Then,
if I may respectfully put in a word in, sir, so much the worse for
wisdom!  (To Valentine, benignly.)  Cheer up, sir, cheer up: every man
is frightened of marriage when it comes to the point; but it often turns
out very comfortable, very enjoyable and happy indeed, sir---from time
to time.  I never was master in my own house, sir: my wife was like your
young lady: she was of a commanding and masterful disposition, which my
son has inherited.  But if I had my life to live twice over, I'd do it
again, I'd do it again, I assure you.  You never can tell, sir: you
never can tell.

PHILIP.  Allow me to remark that if Gloria has made up her mind---

DOLLY.  The matter's settled and Valentine's done for.  And we're
missing all the dances.

VALENTINE (to Gloria, gallantly making the best of it).  May I have a
dance---

BOHUN (interposing in his grandest diapason).  Excuse me: I claim
that privilege as counsel's fee.  May I have the honor---thank you.
(He dances away with Gloria and disappears among the lanterns, leaving
Valentine gasping.)

VALENTINE (recovering his breath).  Dolly: may I--- (offering himself
as her partner)?

DOLLY.  Nonsense!  (Eluding him and running round the table to the
fireplace.)  Finch---my Finch!  (She pounces on McComas and makes him
dance.)

McCOMAS (protesting).  Pray restrain --- really --- (He is borne off
dancing through the window.)

VALENTINE (making a last effort).  Mrs. Clandon: may I---

PHILIP (forestalling him).  Come, mother.  (He seizes his mother and
whirls her away.)

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating).  Phil, Phil--- (She shares McComas's
fate.)

CRAMPTON (following them with senile glee).  Ho! ho!  He! he! he!
(He goes into the garden chuckling at the fun.)

VALENTINE (collapsing on the ottoman and staring at the waiter).  I
might as well be a married man already.  (The waiter contemplates the
captured Duellist of Sex with affectionate commiseration, shaking his
head slowly.)

CURTAIN.


