
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR

Or

From College Campus to the Clouds

by

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD
Author of "The Rover Boys at School," "The Rover Boys on
the Ocean," "The Putnam Hall Cadets,"
"The Putnam Hall Rivals," Etc.

Illustrated







[Illustration: "THREE CHEERS FOR THE ROVER BOYS!" CALLED OUT
                ONE OF THE SENIORS.
_The Rover Boys in the Air. Frontispiece_--(Page 123.)]



New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers


       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD
THE ROVER BOYS SERIES

THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR

(Other volumes in preparation.)

THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES

THE PUTNAM HALL CADETS
THE PUTNAM HALL RIVALS
THE PUTNAM HALL CHAMPIONS
THE PUTNAM HALL REBELLION
THE PUTNAM HALL ENCAMPMENT
THE PUTNAM HALL MYSTERY

_12mo, Cloth. Illustrated
Price, per volume, 60 cents, postpaid_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, New York


       *       *       *       *       *


Copyright, 1912, by
Edward Stratemeyer



_The Rover Boys in the Air_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I. THE BOYS AND THE BIPLANE

    II. SOMETHING ABOUT THE ROVER BOYS

   III. SAM BRINGS NEWS

    IV. AT THE TELEPHONE

     V. LOOKING FOR THE LOST FLYING MACHINE

    VI. TWO OLD ENEMIES

   VII. THE RUNAWAY HORSES

  VIII. TRIAL FLIGHTS

    IX. THE NEW ARRIVAL

     X. FUN WITH OLD RICKS

    XI. OFF FOR BRILL COLLEGE

   XII. A GRAND ARRIVAL

  XIII. SOME INTERESTING NEWS

   XIV. THE BIRTHDAY FEAST

    XV. A PERILOUS FLIGHT

   XVI. DICK AND DORA

  XVII. CAUGHT IN A HAILSTORM

 XVIII. TOM AND HIS FUN

   XIX. STARTLING NEWS FROM HOME

    XX. GRACE'S REVELATION

   XXI. FOLLOWING DORA AND NELLIE

  XXII. OVER THE BIG WOODS

 XXIII. AT CLOSE QUARTERS

  XXIV. AT THE SWAMP

   XXV. THE TRAIL OF THE TOURING CAR

  XXVI. THE MOONLIT TRAIL

 XXVII. THE CHAUFFEUR OF THE TOURING CAR

XXVIII. AT THE OLD MANSION

  XXIX. THE ARM OF THE LAW

   XXX. THE ROUND-UP--CONCLUSION




INTRODUCTION


MY DEAR BOYS: This is a complete story in itself, but forms the
sixteenth volume issued under the general title of "Rover Boys Series
for Young Americans."

This line was started thirteen years ago by the publication of the first
three volumes, "The Rover Boys at School," "On the Ocean," and "In the
Jungle." I hoped that the young people would like the stories, but I was
hardly prepared for the very warm welcome the volumes received. The
three books were followed by a fourth, "The Rover Boys Out West," and
then, yearly, by "On the Great Lakes," "In Camp," "On Land and Sea," "On
the River," "On the Plains," "In Southern Waters," "On the Farm," "On
Treasure Isle," "At College," and then by "Down East," where we last
left our heroes and their friends.

Of course, as is but natural, Dick, Tom and Sam are older than when we
first met them. Indeed, Dick is thinking of getting married and settling
down, and with such a nice girl as Dora Stanhope, who could blame him?
All of the boys are at college, finishing their education, and all are
as wideawake as ever, and Tom is just as full of merriment. They have
some strenuous times, and take a trip through the air that is a good
deal out of the ordinary. They meet some of their old enemies, and prove
that they are heroes in the best meaning of that much-abused term.

The publishers report a sale of this series of books of _over a million
copies_! This is truly amazing to me, and again, as in the past, I thank
my many young friends for their cordial reception of what I have written
for them. I trust the present story will interest them and prove of
benefit.

Affectionately and sincerely yours,

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD.




THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR




CHAPTER I

THE BOYS AND THE BIPLANE


"Fo' de land sakes, Massa Dick, wot am dat contraption yo' boys dun put
togedder back ob de bahn yesterday?"

"Why, Aleck, don't you know what that is?" returned Dick Rover, with a
smile at the colored man. "That's a biplane."

"A biplane, eh?" repeated Alexander Pop, the colored helper around the
Rover homestead. He scratched his woolly head thoughtfully. "Yo' don't
mean to say it am lak a plane a carpenter man uses, does yo', Massa
Dick? 'Pears lak to me it was moah lak some ship sails layin'
down,--somethin' lak dem ships we see over in Africy, when we went into
dem jungles to find yo' fadder."

"No, it has nothing to do with a carpenter's plane, Aleck," answered
Dick, with a laugh. "A biplane is a certain kind of a flying machine."

"Wat's dat? A flyin' machine? Shorely, Massa Dick, yo' ain't gwine to
try to fly?" exclaimed Aleck, in horror.

"That is just what I am going to do, Aleck, after I have had a few
lessons. I hope to fly right over the house, just like a bird."

"No! no! Don't you try dat, Massa Dick! You'll break yo' neck suah!
Don't yo' try it! I--I can't allow it nohow--an' yo' aunt won't allow it
neither!" And the colored man shook his head most emphatically.

"Now, don't get excited, Aleck," said Dick, calmly. "I won't go up until
I am sure of what I am doing. Why, don't you know that flying in the air
is getting to be a common thing these days? Tom and Sam and I bought
that biplane in New York last week, and a man who knows all about flying
is coming out to the farm to teach us how to run it. After we know how
to sail through the air we'll take you up with us."

"Me!" ejaculated the colored man, and rolled his eyes wildly. "Not in a
thousand years, Massa Dick, an' not fo' all dat treasure yo' dun brung
home from Treasure Isle! No, sah, de ground am good enough fo' Aleck
Pop!" And he backed away, as if afraid Dick Rover might carry him off
then and there.

"Hello, Aleck!" cried a merry voice at this moment, and Tom Rover came
into view. "Want to take a sail through the clouds for a change?"

"Massa Tom, am yo' really thinking ob goin' up in dat contraption?"
demanded the colored man, earnestly.

"Sure thing, Aleck. And you'll want to go, too, before long. Think of
flying along like a bird!" And Tom Rover spread out his arms and moved
them slowly up and down. "Oh, it's grand!"

"Yo' won't be no bird when yo' come down ker-flop!" murmured Aleck,
soberly. "Yo' will be all busted up, dat's wot yo'll be!"

"We won't fall, don't you worry," continued Tom. "This biplane is a
first-class machine, warranted in all kinds of weather."

"If it am a flyin' machine wot fo' you call it a biplane?" asked the
colored man curiously.

"Bi stands for two," explained Dick. "A bicycle means two cycles, or two
wheels. A biplane means two planes, or two surfaces of canvas. This
biplane of ours, as you can see, has two surfaces, or decks, an upper
and a lower. A monoplane has only one plane, and a triplane has three.
Now you understand, don't you, Aleck?"

"I dun reckon I do, Massa Dick. But look yeah, boys, yo' take my advice
an' don't yo' try to sail frough de air in dat bicycleplane, or wot yo'
call it. 'Tain't safe nohow! Yo' stick to de hosses, an' dat
autermobile, an' de boat on de ribber. A boy wasn't meant to be a bird
nohow!"

"How about being an angel, Aleck?" asked Tom, slyly.

"Huh! An angel, eh? Well, if yo' go up in dat bicycleplane maybe yo'
will be an angel after yo' fall out, even if yo' ain't one when yo'
starts." And with this remark Aleck Pop hurried away to his work in the
house.

"That's one on you, Tom," cried Dick, with a broad smile. "Poor Aleck!
he evidently has no use for flying machines."

"Well, Dick, now the machine is together, it does look rather scary,"
answered Tom Rover, slowly. "I want to see that aviator try it out
pretty well before I risk my neck going up."

"Oh, so do I. And we'll have to have a good many lessons in running the
engine, and in steering, and all that. I begin to think running a flying
machine is a good deal harder than running an auto, or a motor boat."

"Yes, I guess it is. Come on down and let us see how the engine works.
We can do that easily enough, for it's a good deal like the engine of
an auto, or a motor boat," went on Tom.

"Where is Sam?"

"He took the auto and went down to the Corners on an errand for Aunt
Martha. He said he'd be back as soon as possible. He's as crazy to get
at the biplane as either of us."

The two boys walked to where the biplane had been put together, in a
large open wagon shed attached to the rear of the big barn. The biplane
has a stretch from side to side of over thirty feet, and the shed had
been cleaned out from end to end to make room for it. There was a rudder
in front and another behind, and in the centre was a broad cane seat,
with a steering wheel, and several levers for controlling the craft.
Back of the seat was the engine, lightly built but powerful, and above
was a good-sized tank of gasoline. The framework of the biplane was of
bamboo, held together by stays of piano wire, and the planes themselves
were of canvas, especially prepared so as to be almost if not quite air
proof. All told, the machine was a fine one, thoroughly up-to-date, and
had cost considerable money.

"We'll have to get a name for this machine," remarked Tom. "Have you any
in mind?"

"Well, I--er--thought we might call her the--er----" And then his big
brother stopped short and grew slightly red in the face.

"I'll bet an apple you were going to say _Dora_," cried Tom quickly.

"Humph," murmured Dick. "Maybe you were going to suggest _Nellie_."

"No, I wasn't," returned Tom, and now he got a little red also. "If I
did that, Sam might come along and want to name it the _Grace_. We had
better give the girls' names a rest. Let's call her the _Dartaway_, that
is, if she really does dart away when she flies."

"All right, Tom; that's a first-class name," responded Dick. "And
_Dartaway_ she shall become, if Sam is willing. Now then, we'll fill
that gasoline tank and let the engine warm up a bit. Probably it will
need some adjusting."

"Can we use the same gasoline as we use in the auto?"

"Yes, on ordinary occasions. In a race you can use a higher grade, so
that aviator said. But then you'll have to readjust the magneto and
carburetor."

"Gracious, Dick! You're not thinking of an air race already, are you!"

"Oh, no! But we might get in a race some day,--and such things are good
to know," answered Dick, as he walked off to the garage, where there
was a barrel of gasoline sunk in the ground, with a pipe connection. He
got out a five-gallon can and filled it, and then poured the gasoline in
the tank of the biplane.

"She'll hold more than that," said Tom, watching him. "Here, give me the
can and I'll fill the tank while we are at it. We'll want plenty of gas
when that aviator gets here."

In a few minutes more the gasoline tank was full, and then the two lads
busied themselves putting the engine in running order, and in filling up
the lubricating oil box. They also oiled up the working parts, and oiled
the propeller bearings and the steering gear.

"Now, I guess she is all ready to run," remarked Dick, at length. "My,
but isn't she a beauty, Tom! Just think of sailing around in her!"

"I'd like to go up right now!" answered the brother. "If only I knew
more about airships, hang me if I wouldn't try it!"

"Don't you dream of it, yet!" answered Dick. "We've got to learn the art
of it, just like a baby has got to learn to walk. If you went up now
you'd come down with a smash sure."

"Maybe I would," mused Tom. "Well, let us try the engine anyhow. And
maybe we can try the propellers," he added, with a longing glance at
the smooth, wooden blades.

"One thing at a time," answered Dick, with a laugh. "We'll try the
engine, but we'll have to tie the biplane fast, or else it may run into
something and get smashed."

"Let us run her out into the field first. It's too gloomy in the shed.
I'll hammer in some stakes and tie her."

The biplane rested on three small rubber-tired wheels, placed in the
form of a triangle. Thus it was an easy matter to roll the big machine
from the shed to the level field beyond. Then Tom ran back and procured
some stakes, several ropes, and a hammer, and soon he had the biplane
staked fast to the ground, after the manner of a small circus tent.

"Now she can't break loose, even if you do start the engine and the
propellers," said he, as he surveyed his work. "Go ahead, Dick, and turn
on the juice!" he cried impatiently.

Dick Rover was just as anxious to see the engine work, and after another
critical inspection he turned on the battery and then walked to one of
the propellers.

"We'll have to start the engine by turning these," he said.

"All right!" cried Tom, catching hold of the other wooden blades. "Now
then, all ready? Heave ahoy, my hearty!" he added, in sailor fashion.

Four times were the wooden blades "turned over" and still the engine
refused to respond. It was hard work, and both of the lads perspired
freely, for it was a hot day in early September.

"Got that spark connected all right?" panted Tom, as he stopped to catch
his breath.

"Yes," was the reply, after Dick had made an inspection. "The engine is
cold, that's all."

"Humph, well I'm not! But come on, let us give her another twist."

The brothers took hold again, and, at a word from Dick, each gave the
wooden paddles of the propellers a vigorous turn. There came a sudden
hiss, followed by a crack and a bang, and then off the engine started
with the loudness of a gattling gun.

"Hurrah! she's started!" yelled Tom, triumphantly. "Say, but she makes
some noise, doesn't she?" he added.

"I should say yes. That's because airship engines don't have mufflers,
like autos," yelled back Dick, to make himself heard above the
explosions.

"And see those propellers go around!" went on Tom, in deep admiration.
"All you can see is a whirr! We sure have a dandy engine in this craft,
Dick!"

"Looks so, doesn't it?" returned Dick, also in admiration. "I reckon the
_Dartaway_ will give a good account of herself, when she is properly
handled. Now, I had better stop the propellers, I guess," he added,
moving toward the front of the biplane to do so.

"Yes! yes! stop em!" yelled Tom, suddenly. "Hurry up, Dick! See how she
is straining to break the ropes! Say, she wants to go up!"

Dick was startled and with good reason. Even while his brother was
speaking there came a sudden snap, and one of the ropes flew apart. Then
up out of the ground came the stake holding another rope. The big
biplane, thus released on one side, slewed around, and Tom was knocked
flat. Then came another snap and two more ropes flew apart.

"She's going! stop her!" screamed Tom, from where he lay, and the next
moment he saw Dick struck full in the face by the machine. Down went the
youth backwards, and as he fell, with a rush and a roar, the biplane
sped over the level ground for a distance of two hundred feet and then
went sailing into the air, headed almost point blank for the Rover
homestead, less than fifty rods away!




CHAPTER II

SOMETHING ABOUT THE ROVER BOYS


"Oh, Dick, are you hurt?"

The cry came from Tom, as he turned over on the ground and struggled to
his feet. He had seen his brother hurled backwards, and he saw that Dick
made no move to arise. He had been struck in the head, and blood was
flowing from a wound over his left ear.

"Oh, maybe he's killed!" gasped poor Tom, and then, for the moment he
forgot all about the flying machine, that was rushing so madly through
the air towards the Rover homestead. He hurried to his brother's side,
at the same time calling for others to come to his assistance.

To my old readers the lads already mentioned will need no introduction.
For the benefit of others let me state that the Rover boys were three in
number, Dick being the oldest, fun-loving Tom coming next, and sturdy
Sam being the youngest. They were the sons of Anderson Rover, a widower,
and when at home, as at present, lived with their father and their
Uncle Randolph and Aunt Martha at a pleasant place known as Valley Brook
farm, in New York state.

While their father was in Africa on a mission of importance, the three
boys had been sent by their uncle to boarding school, as related in the
first volume of this series, entitled, "The Rover Boys at School." The
place was Putnam Hall Military Academy, and there the lads had made many
friends and also a few enemies.

From school the boys had made a short trip on the ocean, and then
another trip into the jungle after their father. Then had followed a
trip out West, and another on the Great Lakes. Later the youths had
camped out in the mountains during the winter, shooting quite some game.
Then they had returned to school, to go into camp during the summer with
the other cadets.

The boys by this time thought their adventures at an end, but more were
soon to follow. There came a long trip on land and sea, and then a
voyage down the Ohio River, and soon after this the Rovers found
themselves on the plains, where they had some adventures far out of the
ordinary. From the plains they went further south, and in southern
waters--the same being the Gulf of Mexico--they solved the mystery of
the deserted steam yacht.

"Now back to the farm for me!" Sam had said at this time, and all were
glad to go back, and also to return to Putnam Hall, from which seat of
learning they presently graduated with honors. Then Mr. Anderson Rover
got word of a valuable treasure, and he and the boys, with a number of
their friends, went to Treasure Isle in search of it. They were followed
by some of their enemies and the latter did all in their power to cause
trouble.

Although the boys had finished at Putnam Hall, their days of learning
were not yet over, and soon they set off for Brill College, a high-grade
seat of learning located in one of our middle-western states. They had
with them an old school chum named John Powell, usually called
"Songbird," because of his habit of making up and reciting so-called
poetry, and were presently joined by another old school companion named
William Philander Tubbs, a dudish chap who thought more of his dress and
the society of ladies than he did of his studies. Tom loved to play
jokes on Tubbs, who was generally too dense to see where the fun came
in.

From the college the boys had taken another trip, as related in the
fifteenth volume of this series, called "The Rover Boys Down East."
There was a mystery about that trip, of which the outside world knew
little, but as that trip has something to do with the events which are
to follow in this story, I will here give such details as seem
necessary.

When the Rover Boys went to Putnam Hall they met three girls, Dora
Stanhope and her two cousins, Nellie and Grace Laning. Dora's mother was
a widow, living not far from the school, and it was not long before a
warm friendship sprang up between Dick and Dora,--a friendship that grew
more and more intimate as the days went by. Dick thought the world of
Dora, and the two were now practically engaged to be married. As for Tom
and Sam, they had taken to the two Laning girls from the start, and
though Tom was too full of fun to pay much attention to girls, yet
whenever Nellie was mentioned, he would grow red in the face; and it was
noticed that whenever Grace was present Sam was usually on hand to keep
her company.

The treasure unearthed on Treasure Isle had belonged to the Stanhope
estate, the bulk of it going to Mrs. Stanhope and Dora and the remainder
to the Lanings, because Mrs. Laning was Mrs. Stanhope's sister. But the
treasure had been claimed by a certain rascal named Sid Merrick and his
nephew, Tad Sobber, and when Merrick lost his life during a hurricane at
sea, Sobber continued to do all he could to get the money and jewels
into his possession.

"It's mine!" he told Dick Rover one day. "It's mine, all mine, and some
day I'm going to get it!"

"You keep on, Tad Sobber, and some day you'll land in prison," had been
Dick's answer. "We found that treasure, and the courts have decided that
it belongs to the Stanhope estate, and you had better keep your hands
off."

But Tad Sobber was not satisfied, and soon he made a move that caused
the worst kind of trouble. There was a learned but unscrupulous man
named Josiah Crabtree who had once been a teacher at Putnam Hall, but
who had been discharged and who had, later on, been sent to prison for
his misdeeds. This Josiah Crabtree had once sought to marry Mrs.
Stanhope, thinking thereby to get control of her money and the money she
held in trust for Dora. The lady was weak and sickly, and the teacher
had tried to hypnotize her into getting married, and had nearly
succeeded, but the plot was nipped in the bud by the Rover boys.

Tad Sobber met Josiah Crabtree and the pair hatched out another plot,
this time to abduct Mrs. Stanhope, getting the lady at the time to bring
a good share of the treasure with her under the impression that it was
to be invested by her friends. The lady was carried off to an island in
Casco Bay, off the coast of Maine, and thither the Rover boys and some
others followed them. There was a good deal of excitement; but in the
end the lady was rescued and the treasure brought back. An effort was
made to capture Tad Sobber and Josiah Crabtree, but the two evildoers
managed to get away.

The home-coming of the boys with Mrs. Stanhope had been a time of great
rejoicing. Dora had embraced Dick over and over again for what he had
done for her mother, and Nellie and Grace had not been backward in
complimenting Tom and Sam on their good work. There had been a general
jubilee which had lasted several days.

"Splendid work, boys, splendid work!" Anderson Rover had said. "I am
proud of you!"

"Better work than the authorities could do," had come from Uncle
Randolph.

"Now that treasure had better be placed where no outsider can get his
hands on it," Mr. Rover had added. And soon after that it was put in the
strong box of a safe deposit company, there to remain until it could be
properly invested.

At Brill College the Rover boys had fallen in with a number of fine
fellows, including Stanley Browne and a German-American student named
Max Spangler. They had also encountered some others, among whom were
Dudd Flockley, Jerry Koswell and Bart Larkspur. Led by Koswell, who was
a thoroughly bad egg, the three last-named students had tried to get the
Rover boys into trouble, and had succeeded. But they overreached
themselves and were exposed, and in sheer fright Koswell and Larkspur
ran away and refused to return. Dudd Flockley was repentant and was
given another chance.

While on the hunt for Mrs. Stanhope, the Rovers had fallen in with
Koswell and Larkspur. But instead of getting aid from the pair, the
latter did what they could to help old Crabtree and Sobber. This brought
on a fight, and Koswell and Larkspur received a thrashing they would
long remember. The former college students might have been arrested,
but, like Crabtree and Sobber, they kept out of sight.

"They are sure a bunch of bad ones," had been Dick Rover's comment, when
referring to Crabtree, Sobber, Koswell and Larkspur. "I wish they were
all in jail."

"I reckon we all wish that," had been Sam Rover's reply. "It's an awful
shame that we didn't capture at least one of 'em."

"Well, we might have caught old Crabtree and Sobber if we hadn't broken
the engine of the motor-boat," put in Tom.

"Well, the engine was broken in a good cause," came from Dick. And he
spoke the truth, as my old readers well know.

Following the home-coming of the boys, and the general jubilee, our
heroes had settled down to enjoy themselves before going back to Brill.
They had intended to take it easy on the farm, but when a great aviation
meet was advertised to take place at the county seat they could not
resist the temptation to be present.

At this meet there were five flying machines,--three biplanes, a
monoplane, and a dirigible balloon. All made good records, and the Rover
boys became wildly enthusiastic over what they saw.

"Say, this suits me right down to the ground!" cried Tom.

"What fun a fellow could have if he had a flying machine and knew how to
run it!" had come from Sam.

"Exactly--if he knew how to run it," had been Dick's words. "But if he
didn't know--well, he might have a nasty tumble, that's all."

"Pooh, Dick! If those fellows can run these machines, so can we," had
been Tom's confident words.

"We know all about autos and motor-boats," Sam had put in.

"That's true, Sam. But a monoplane or a biplane, or any kind of an
aeroplane, isn't an auto or a motor-boat."

"Are you afraid?" demanded Tom.

"Oh, no! Only if we got a flying machine we'd have to be careful about
what we tried to do."

"Hurrah! It's settled!" cried Tom, who went headlong into everything.
"We'll get a machine to-morrow! How much do they cost?"

"I don't know--several thousand dollars, I fancy," answered his elder
brother.

"Boiled umbrellas, Dick! As much as that?"

"I think so."

"Why look at some of 'em," declared Sam. "Nothing but bamboo poles and a
few wires, and canvas,--and the engine!"

"Yes, but the poles, wires and canvas have to be put together just
right, Sam, and those engines are as powerful as they are light. And
then don't forget the propellers, and the steering outfit, and the other
things."

"Come on and ask one of the men about them," came from Tom; and a little
later they had a long talk with an aviator named Captain Colby, who
proved to be a relative to Larry Colby, one of their former chums at
Putnam Hall. He had heard about the Rover boys and some of their doings,
and willingly told them all they wanted to know.

The boys went home with their minds full of flying machines, and as the
Rovers were all well-to-do, and as the three lads had in the past proved
capable of taking care of themselves, it was not a very difficult matter
for them to persuade their father to let them buy a biplane. Then,
through Captain Colby, they learned where the flying machine could be
obtained, and the very next day bought the affair and had it shipped to
the farm, and also arranged with the aviator to visit them and give them
a number of lessons.

"We've got three weeks before we have to go back to college," Tom had
said. "If we are quick to learn we can have lots of fun in that time."

"Yes, and if we do learn, perhaps we can take the biplane to college
with us and astonish some of the students and the faculty," Dick had
added.

"That's the talk!" cried the youngest Rover. "We'll take it along!"

That morning Sam had gone off on an errand as already mentioned. Then
Dick and Tom had gotten out the flying machine and started up the engine
and the propellers. The ropes holding the biplane had broken or torn
loose from the ground, and now the machine had gone off with a wild
swoop, hurling poor Dick flat on his back and injuring him, how
seriously was still to be learned.




CHAPTER III

SAM BRINGS NEWS


As Tom ran over to his brother's side he could not help but give a
glance at the flying machine, which was rising higher and higher in the
air, with a noise from the engine that sounded like a battery of gattling
guns in action.

"Hi! hi! Wot's that?" came in a startled voice from the other side of
the barn, and Jack Ness, the Rovers hired man, came running into view.
"By gum, if them boys ain't gone an' flew without waitin' fer that man
to show 'em! Who's doin' it? I don't see nobuddy." And the hired man
blinked in amazement at the sight before him. "Is Sam in there?"

"Nobody is in the machine," answered Tom, who was kneeling beside his
brother. "Oh, gracious! Look at that!" he exclaimed.

"There goes the chimbley!" roared Jack Ness, as the biplane swooped just
high enough to clear the roof of the Rover homestead. One of the wheels
underneath struck a chimney a glancing blow, hurling the bricks in all
directions. As they came clattering down, from the house out ran Mrs.
Rover, followed by her husband and the hired help. Anderson Rover was
away on business.

"What is the matter--is it a--er--a cyclone?" gasped Randolph Rover.

"I don't know, I'm sure," answered Mrs. Rover. "But it's a terrible
noise."

"Look! look!" shrieked the cook, pointing upward. "Saints preserve us!"
she moaned. "'Tis the end of the world!"

"A flying machine!" murmured Randolph Rover. He gazed around hurriedly.
"Can it be the boys?"

"Oh, those boys! They will surely kill themselves!" groaned Mrs. Rover.
"They know nothing about airships!"

"Say, dar ain't nobuddy in dat contraption!" came suddenly from Aleck
Pop. "It am flyin' all by itself!"

"By itself?" repeated Randolph Rover. "Impossible, Alexander! A flying
machine cannot run itself. There must be somebody to steer, and
manipulate the engine, and----"

"Oh, maybe whoever was in it fell out!" screamed Mrs. Rover, and now she
looked ready to faint.

"We must find out about this!" returned her husband quickly. "They had
the machine in the shed back of the barn." And he ran in that direction,
followed by the colored man, and then by his wife and the cook. In the
meantime the biplane soared on and on, ever rising in the air and moving
off in the direction of the river.

When the others arrived they found that Tom had carried poor Dick to the
wagon shed and placed him on a pile of horse blankets, and was washing
his wounded head with water. At the sight of her nephew lying there so
still Mrs. Rover gave a scream.

"Oh, Tom, is he--is he----" she could not go on.

"He's only stunned, I guess, Aunt Martha," was the reply. "But he got a
pretty good crack."

"Did the flying machine do it?" queried Randolph Rover.

"Yes. We had it tied fast, but when we started the engine and the
propellers it broke loose and ran right over Dick."

"I dun tole you boys to be careful," burst out Aleck. "It's a suah
wondah yo' ain't bof killed. Wot kin I do, Massa Tom?" And he got down
on his knees beside Dick, for he loved these lads, who had done so much
for him in the past.

"He's only stunned, I think--and he's coming around now," answered Tom,
and at that moment Dick commenced to stir. Then he gave a gasp, opened
his eyes, and suddenly sat up.

"Stop her! Stop her, Tom!" he murmured.

"Dick! Dick, my poor, dear boy!" burst out Mrs. Rover, and got down
beside him. "Oh, I am so thankful that you weren't killed!"

"Why--er--why!" stammered the oldest Rover boy. "Say, what's happened?"
he went on, looking from one to another of the group. "Where's the
biplane?"

"Flew away," answered Tom. "You got struck and knocked down, don't you
remember?"

"Ah!" Dick drew a deep breath. "Yes, I remember now. Oh, how my head
aches!" He put up his hand and noticed the blood. "Got a pretty good
rap, didn't I? What did the machine do, Tom; go to smash?"

"I don't know. The last I saw of her she was sailing over the house."

"She kept right on a-sailin'," answered Aleck. "Went on right ober de
woods along de ribber."

"You don't say! Then we'll have a time of it getting her back." Dick
gritted his teeth. "Phew! how my head hurts!"

"Bring him to the house, and we'll bind his head up," said Mrs. Rover.
"I'll wash the wound first and we can put on some witch hazel."

"Yes, that or some peroxide of hydrogen," added Randolph Rover, who was
a scientific farmer and something of a chemist. "That will kill any
germs that may lodge there."

Dick was half led and half carried to the house and placed on a couch in
the sitting room, and then his aunt went to work to make him
comfortable. The cut was not a deep one, and the youth was suffering
more from shock than from anything else.

"I'll be all right by to-morrow," he assured his Aunt Martha. "I only
got a knock-down blow, that's all."

"The machine didn't fight fairly," added Tom, who had to have his little
joke. "It hit Dick before he was ready."

"Well, I am thankful it was no worse," answered Mrs. Rover. "But it is
bad enough."

"And we'll have to have a mason here to mend the chimney," added
Randolph Rover.

"I'll get a man from the Corners to-morrow," said Tom. "But say, I'd
like to know where the biplane went to," he continued anxiously.

"Maybe it landed on some other house," mused Randolph. "If it did you
may have more to pay for than a dismantled chimney."

"Oh, houses are few and far between in that direction, Uncle Randolph.
What I am afraid of is, that the biplane came down in the trees or on
the rocks and got smashed. That would be a big loss."

"That is true."

"I can send Jack Ness and Aleck Pop out to look for the machine," went
on Tom. "And I can go out myself with Sam, when he returns."

"Yes, you'd better do that," answered Dick. "And I'll go out with you
to-morrow, if you can't locate the machine to-day."

"Better take it easy, Dick," cautioned his aunt.

"Oh, I'll be all right by to-morrow, Aunt Martha. A good night's sleep
will be sure to set me on my feet again. And I can fix this cut up with
a bit of adhesive plaster."

"Did you have much gasoline on board?" queried Randolph Rover.

"The tank was full," answered Tom. "Oh, the _Dartaway_ could go a good
many miles, if she wanted to," he added, dubiously.

"The _Dartaway_? Was that the name of the craft?"

"Yes, and she did _dart away_, didn't she?" and Tom grinned.

"For all we know, she may have gone fifty or a hundred miles," continued
Dick. "But I doubt it. With nobody to steer she'd be bound to turn
turtle or something before long."

"Well, if she's busted, she's busted, that's all," answered Tom,
philosophically. Yet the thought of the beautiful biplane being a wreck
caused him to sigh.

A few minutes later the honk of an automobile horn was heard in the lane
leading to the house, and Sam Rover appeared, driving the family car. He
was alone on the front seat and in the tonneau had a variety of things
purchased in the village for his aunt and the others.

"Hello! what does this mean?" cried Sam, as he came into the sitting
room and saw Dick with his head bound up. "What did you do? Did you get
that fussing with the biplane?"

"I did, Sam," was the answer.

"We both had a set-to with her ladyship," put in Tom. "And the biplane
floored us on the first round." And then he told his younger brother of
what had occurred.

"Humph! that's too bad!" murmured Sam. He took Dick's hand. "Not hurt
much, really?" he asked in a lower voice.

"No, Sam, I'll soon be O. K."

"Jumping lobsters! But this beats all!" went on the youngest Rover. "I
don't know if I had better tell you or not." And he looked around, to
see if anybody but his brothers was present. The grown folks had left
the room.

"Tell us what?" demanded Tom, who quickly saw that Sam had something on
his mind.

"Tell you the news."

"What news?" asked Dick.

"Maybe you can't stand it, Dick. It will keep till to-morrow."

"See here, Sam, I'm not a baby," retorted the oldest Rover boy. "If
you've got anything worth telling tell it."

"But it may make your head ache worse, Dick."

"No, it won't. Now, what's the news? Out with it."

Instead of answering at once, Sam Rover walked over to the door and
closed it carefully.

"No use of worrying the others about it," he half whispered.

"But what is it?" demanded Tom, and now he showed that he was as
impatient as was Dick.

"I got a letter from Grace Laning," went on Sam, slowly, and turned a
bit red. "She told me a piece of news that is bound to upset you, Dick."

"Is it about the Stanhopes--about Dora?" questioned Dick, half rising
from the couch on which he rested.

"Yes,--and about some others, too. But don't get excited. Nothing very
bad has happened, yet."

"What did happen, Sam? Hurry up and tell us,--don't keep us in
suspense!" cried Dick.

"Well; then, if you want it in a few words, here goes. Grace was
visiting the Stanhopes a few days ago and she and Dora went to Ithaca to
do some shopping. While in that town, coming along the street leading to
the boat landing, they almost ran into Tad Sobber and old Josiah
Crabtree."

"What! Those rascals in that town--so near to the Stanhope home!"
exclaimed Dick. "And after what has happened! We must have them
arrested!"

"I don't think you can do it, Dick--not from what Grace says in her
letter."

"What does she say?"

"She says she and Dora were very much frightened, especially when they
discovered that both Sobber and old Crabtree had been drinking freely.
The two got right in front of the girls and commenced to threaten them
and threaten us. Nobody else was near, and the girls didn't know what to
do. But at last they got away and ran for the boat, and what became of
Sobber and old Crabtree they don't know."

"What did the rascals say to them?" questioned Tom, who could see that
his brother had not told all of his tale.

"They said that they were going to square up with Dora and with Mrs.
Stanhope, and said they would square up with us, too, and in a way we
little expected. Grace wrote that Sobber pulled a big roll of bank bills
out of his pocket and flourished it in her face. 'Do you see that?' he
asked. 'Well, I can get more where that came from, and I am going to use
that and more, too, just to get even with the Rovers. I'm getting my
trap set for them, and when they fall into it they'll wish they had
never been born! I'll blow them and their whole family sky-high, that's
what I'll do.'"

"Sobber said that?" asked Dick, slowly.

"So Grace writes. No wonder she and Dora were scared to death."

"Oh, maybe he was only blowing, especially if he had been drinking too
much," came from Tom.

"I don't know about that," answered Dick, with a long sigh. "With such a
rascal at liberty,--and with money in his pocket--there is no telling
what will happen."

"What do you suppose he meant by blowing us sky-high?" asked Tom. But
this question was not answered, for at that moment Mrs. Rover came into
the room, and the course of the conversation had to be changed,--the
lads not wishing to worry her with their new troubles.




CHAPTER IV

AT THE TELEPHONE


Tom and Sam spent the balance of the day in looking for the missing
biplane, walking down to the river, and even visiting Humpback Falls,
where the youngest Rover had once had such a thrilling adventure.

"Don't seem to be in sight," remarked Tom, after they had tramped
through the woods and over the rocks until they were tired.

"Looks to me as if the _Dartaway_ had gone further than we supposed
possible," replied Sam. "Maybe she's a hundred miles from here."

"Oh, she may have gone clean over to the ocean and dropped in," said
Tom. "But I don't see how she could--with nobody to steer. How long
would an auto keep to the road without somebody steering?"

"Do you know what I think we ought to do? Go back home and telephone to
the villages and towns in the direction the biplane took. Somebody must
have seen the craft,--if she kept in the air."

"By Jove, Sam, that's the idea! Why didn't you think of that before? It
would have saved us quite a tramp."

The two boys turned back, and reached home a little after the supper
hour. The meal had been held back for them.

"Any luck?" asked Dick, who sat in an easy chair on the front piazza.
His cuts had been plastered up and he felt quite like himself again.

"No luck; but Sam has an idea," answered Tom, and mentioned what it was.

"You must have supper first," said Mrs. Rover. "Then you can do all the
telephoning you please." And so it was agreed.

During the past few months the telephone service in the neighborhood of
Dexter's Corners had been greatly improved and the lines could be
connected with nearly all of the villages and towns roundabout.

"I'll try Carwood first," said Sam. "I'll call up Tom Bender. He's a
wideawake fellow and would know if an airship had been seen."

Carwood was soon had on the wire and Sam presently was talking to the
boy he had mentioned--a lad who worked in the general store with his
father.

"See an airship?" cried Tom Bender. "We sure did--scooting over this
burgh like a streak, too! Was it your machine? Who was running it? I
tried to make out but couldn't."

"Nobody was running it," answered Sam. "It ran away on its own account,
from back of our barn. Where did it go to?"

"Ran away! Suffering toadstools, Sam, you don't mean it! I don't know
where it went, it went so fast."

"Which way was it headed? Try to tell me as nearly as you can."

"It was headed over Bear Hill, near the Spring. That would about take it
over Rayville."

"Thank you, Tom; then I'll call up somebody in Rayville. Good-bye."

"Oh, say, Sam, hold on a minute. You say the machine broke away. How was
that?" Tom Bender was all curiosity.

"We were trying the engine and propellers, that's all. I'll tell you the
rest when I see you," answered the youngest Rover, and rang off. "Tom
would keep me answering questions for a year if I let him," he added, to
his brothers.

He next tried the Rayville general store, but could get no information
concerning the missing biplane. Then he tried several farmers who were
utter strangers to him but whose names were in the telephone directory.

"Airship, eh?" queried one farmer, a man named Peter Marley. "Well, we
sure did see an airship, fer it came nigh onto rippin' off the roof o'
the barn. Ef I had the feller here as was runin' it I'd give him a dose
o' buckshot! He nigh scart my wife into a fit, he did!"

"Which way did the airship go, Mr. Marley?"

"Went right over into Rocker's Woods,--over where the old saw mill used
to be."

"Did the airship come down, do you think?"

"I guess so--leas'wise she looks like she was goin' to come down. But
who was the crazy loon as was runnin' her?"

"Nobody was running the craft--she ran away on her own hook."

"By gum! Ye don't tell me! No wonder she acted so blamed crazy like! Any
reward fer her?" And the farmer's voice betrayed a sudden interest.

"I don't know--I'll find out," answered Sam, and then consulted hastily
with his brothers.

"Tell him the biplane is ours and if he will help locate it and get it
to a safe place we will pay him well for his services," said Dick.

"When can we go to Rayville?"

"First thing in the morning. There's a good road, and we can make the
sixteen miles in the auto in no time."

"All right," said Sam, and told Peter Marley of what had been said. The
farmer agreed to remain around his house until they arrived and then do
all in his power to help locate the _Dartaway_.

"Dick, do you think you'll be able to take that trip?" questioned
Randolph Rover. "Hadn't you better remain behind? I can go with Tom and
Sam if necessary."

"Oh, I'll be all right in the morning," was the reply.

"But you've got to let me and Sam run the machine," put in Tom. "No use
of your doing that."

"All right," answered the eldest Rover boy.

That night, when the others had gone to bed, the three Rover boys
gathered in Dick's room to discuss further the news regarding Josiah
Crabtree and Tad Sobber.

"Do you suppose it is possible that Sobber thinks to come here and blow
the house up?" queried Tom.

"He might be equal to it," answered Dick, soberly. "We'll have to keep
our eyes peeled, and, when we go back to Brill, we'll have to warn dad
and Uncle Randolph."

"Do you know, dad looked worried when he went away," put in Sam.

"I noticed it, Sam. Did he say anything to you about business?"

"Not a word. Why, do you think it's that?"

"There is some trouble out west--has been ever since there was a strike
at that Golden Horseshoe mine in which dad invested so heavily last
summer. They had a strike, and now one crowd is trying to get the
control from another crowd. I don't know the particulars, but I guess
dad is worried."

"Dick, don't you think you ought to help him in these affairs?" came
suddenly from Sam. "Uncle Randolph is too absorbed in his books and in
scientific farming to pay any attention, and--well, dad isn't as young
as he used to be--and we are growing older."

"I've been thinking of that, Sam. I wish I was through college, I'd jump
right into the game and try to take the load from his shoulders."

"Are you going to take the full course?"

"No, I talked it over with dad last week and I'm going to take the
shorter course. He said you two could take the long course if you wanted
to."

"Not much! The short course for yours truly!" cried Tom.

"Ditto here!" came from Sam.

"I want to settle down and get into business," went on Tom.

"He thinks Nellie won't wait much longer," remarked Sam, with a wink at
Dick.

"Huh! I guess, you think Grace won't wait!" snorted Tom. "Didn't I see
you looking over that furniture and picture catalogue the other day? Ha!
I caught you, Sammy, my boy!"

"Rats!" cried Sam, growing suddenly red in the face. "I was thinking of
buying a new chair and maybe a picture or two for our quarters at Brill.
The old ones are pretty punk, if you'll remember. Besides, we've got to
wait until Dick and Dora step off, you know," went on the youngest
Rover.

"That's so--so we have," added Tom, with more of a grin than ever. "By
the way, Dick, how much longer are you going to linger before you scrape
up money enough to pay the minister's fee?"

"Just long enough to hammer some common-sense into the heads of two
brothers of mine!" cried Dick, and threw a book at Tom and a pillow at
Sam. "Now go to bed and don't forget to wake up early, for we want to be
in Rayville by eight o'clock, so we can have all day, if necessary, to
locate the biplane." And then he chased Tom and Sam out of the bedroom
and locked the door on them.

Left to himself, Dick walked slowly across the room to where the bureau
stood. On the top was a small, framed picture of Dora Stanhope, that had
been taken only a few months before. Dick could not help but take up the
portrait and gaze at it long and earnestly.

"Dear, dear Dora!" he murmured fondly. "The best girl in all this wide
world! Some day you are going to be Mrs. Dick Rover, and that day can't
come any too soon for me. Oh, I hope those rascals don't do anything
more to harm you!"

Dick was still holding the picture when there came a soft knock on the
door.

"Who is it? What do you want?" he asked, as he put the picture down.

"Dick, my child," came in a whisper from the fun-loving Tom. "Be careful
and don't kiss all the glaze off that photo. She's a sweet girl,
warranted all silk and a yard wide, but the glaze may be poisonous,
and----"

"Tom, if you don't get to bed I'll--I'll throw a pitcher of water over
you!" cried Dick, and started to unlock the door. With a merry laugh Tom
ran off; and that was the last seen or heard of him that night.

Before retiring Dick gave his wounded head another application of
liniment, and in the morning he was gratified to find that much of the
soreness was gone. The cuts, of course, remained, and he bound these up
with extra strips of adhesive plaster. The three lads had an early
breakfast, and by half-past seven o'clock were in the touring car, bound
for Rayville.

"How are you going to get the biplane back here, even if you do find
it?" questioned their uncle, before they started off.

"I don't know," answered Dick. "It will depend on what condition the
_Dartaway_ is in. She may be so broken up as to be unfit for anything,
and then it wouldn't pay to move her."

"Well, better not attempt to fly in the craft," cautioned Randolph
Rover.

"Hardly," said Tom. "Maybe we'll telephone for Captain Colby to come and
get her."

Tom was at the wheel of the touring car and, once the farm was left
behind, and they were on a fairly good country road, he advanced the
spark and the gasoline control until they were running at twenty-five
and then thirty miles an hour.

"Now, don't get gay, Tom!" warned Dick. "This road wasn't built for
racing."

"Pooh, what's thirty miles an hour!" declared the fun-loving Rover, who
just then felt like "letting out." "You know this machine can make fifty
and better, Dick."

"I know it, but you've got to have a safer road than this, Tom."

"Beware of the turn!" cried Sam, who sat on the front seat with Tom,
while Dick was alone in the tonneau. "It's a bad one!"

"I know it, but I'll make it," answered Tom, and then the touring car
reached a bend in the road, and went whizzing around it with a sudden
lurch that made Sam cling desperately to the seat and sent Dick flying
from one side of the tonneau to the other.

"Tom, be careful!" cried Sam. "Do you want to pitch me out on my head?"

"Do that again, and I'll make you let Sam drive," came from Dick.

"It was the brake--it didn't act just right," answered Tom, just a
little frightened. "I think it's loose."

"Better stop and look at it," answered Dick, promptly.

"Oh, I guess it's all right," said Tom. The touring car continued to
move along, up a winding hill. Then came a level stretch for half a
mile, and then a sharp descent, leading into Carwood.

"Now be careful----" commenced Dick. And then stopped short, for a
sudden snapping sound reached his ears.

"What's that?" cried Sam, in alarm.

"The brake--it's broken!" answered Tom. And then he set his teeth
grimly, to try to guide the heavy touring car down the steep hill
without disaster.




CHAPTER V

LOOKING FOR THE LOST FLYING MACHINE


It was the foot brake that had given away. The hand brake was still fit
for use, but each of the Rover boys remembered with dismay that this
brake had been loose for some time. They had thought to tighten it up,
but other matters had claimed their attention, and they had not deemed
it absolutely necessary before taking the short trip to Rayville, since
on starting the other brake had seemed to be in good order.

"Can you do it, Tom?" asked Dick, quickly, as the big car gathered
headway on the steep hill.

"I'll try!" was Tom's reply. "But it's some hill."

"If only we don't meet anything," put in Sam. "Blow the horn, Dick!"

The oldest Rover boy did as requested, leaning over from the back seat
to do so, and thus leaving Tom free to manipulate the steering wheel.
Dick also set the hand brake a notch tighter, but this did little good,
since it was the bands that were worn.

On and on bounded the touring car, down the long hill. On both sides the
road was bound by rocks and trees, with nasty gullies in several spots.
Here and there were "resting spots" for teams, and over these
indentations flew the automobile with jolts that threatened to break all
the springs at once.

"The turn! Beware of the turn!" cried Sam and Dick together, when about
three-quarters of the hill had been passed.

Tom nodded but said not a word. He had thrown the motive power to the
low gear, and thus the engine was doing something towards holding the
car back.

Suddenly Dick uttered a cry, and the next minute Sam saw him dive down
to the bottom of the tonneau and bring up several long ropes to which
were attached a number of hooks. He had placed these in the automobile
for possible use in getting the _Dartaway_ out of the woods or from
among the rocks.

With care Dick took the hooks and threw them out of the machine. At the
same time he leaned over and allowed the ends of the ropes to catch on
the swiftly-revolving wheels of the machine.

"Maybe they'll hold something--anyway I hope so," he said.

They had now reached the turn. Tom was running as closely as possible
to the inner side and Dick had commenced to toot the horn again. With a
slipping and sliding, the touring car went over the dirt and stones,
rushing nearer and nearer to the gully on the outer edge of the highway.

"Look! Look!" screamed Sam, a second later. "A carriage, and three
ladies in it!"

He was right, and the carriage was less than a hundred yards ahead. But
just now Tom could think of nothing but the turn, for the machine was
running closer than ever to the gully. If they went down in that the
touring car would most likely turn turtle, and they might all be killed.

But they did not go down into the gully. By sheer good luck Tom managed
to throw the automobile back into the roadway, two wheels for a second
spinning in midair. Then he had to reckon with the other danger--that of
hitting the carriage with the three ladies.

The ladies had heard the tooting of the auto horn and had tried to draw
up to the side of the road. But the incline was still steep and the two
horses evidently did not like the looks of that gully.

"You can't pass them!" groaned Sam, and just then came a grinding from
underneath the touring car. This was followed by a series of jerks, and
then came one final jerk that brought the automobile to a standstill and
all but sent the Rover boys flying over the engine hood.

"Well, we've stopped!" panted Tom, when he could catch his breath. "I
guess the brake held somehow."

"No, it didn't," answered Sam. "It's another brake, one that Dick heaved
overboard." And he pointed to the ropes and hooks. One hook, the
biggest, had caught in a rock lining the gully, and the ropes were in a
mess around the wheels and the rear axle.

"Good for you!" murmured Tom. "It saved us from running into that
carriage."

"Are you men going on?" cried one of the ladies, noticing that the
automobile had come to a stop.

"Not just yet!" sang out Dick. "You can go ahead if you wish. We'll wait
until you get down to the bottom of the hill--and maybe we'll wait
longer," he added in an undertone.

"You scared us nearly to death," said another of the ladies, tartly; and
then the carriage went on and was soon lost to sight on a side road.

The three youths alighted, and after blocking the wheels with stones, so
that it might not get away unexpectedly, commenced an inspection of the
car.

"The ropes wouldn't do much damage but the hooks might," said Dick. "But
I couldn't think of anything else to do."

"It was grand of you to do that," answered Tom, warmly. "I was a fool to
let her out as I did," he added bluntly. "I'll know better next time."

That was Tom, often headstrong but quick to acknowledge a fault.

Not without much difficulty did the three youths manage to get the ropes
disentangled from the rear wheels and the back axle. It was found that
one of the hooks had gone into a tire, causing a blow-out that, in the
general excitement, nobody had noticed. But otherwise everything seemed
to be all right, apart, of course, from the broken brake rod, and the
boys were thankful.

"I guess we can manage to run to the nearest blacksmith shop," said
Dick, "and there we can get the rod mended."

"What a lucky thing that big hook caught in the rock!" cried Sam.

"It's the one thing that saved us from going into the carriage,"
returned Tom, and his face was very sober as he spoke. For a time being
he did not feel like running the car further and readily agreed to let
Sam take hold, after another tire had been adjusted. To keep the
automobile from going down the remainder of the hill too rapidly, they
allowed one of the ropes to remain on the rear axle, and to this tied a
small fallen tree, that made an excellent drag.

When the level roadway was gained once more they made good time to
Carwood, and there called on the blacksmith to repair the broken brake
rod. While waiting they ran into Tom Bender, and the boy was very
anxious to know all about the lost aeroplane.

"Say, but you fellows have a cinch!" he said, in admiration. "You get
what you please. Wish I was in your shoes!"

"You'd not want to be in our shoes when that brake rod broke," answered
Sam bluntly. "Eh, Tom?"

"Not much!" replied his brother.

At last they were on the way again. They had telephoned to Peter Marley,
so that the farmer would know the cause of the delay. Sam did the
driving and now the machine went along well, and almost before they knew
it they were at Rayville and asking the way to the Marley farm. This was
on a back road, but the way was good and they reached the farm without
trouble, excepting that they had to slow down to let a herd of cows pass
them.

"Got here at last, have ye!" cried Peter Marley, as he came out to
greet them. "You kin put that 'mobile under the wagon shed if ye want
to," he added.

"Can't we use it to go after the biplane?" questioned Dick.

"No, there hain't no fit road. If ye say so, we can go on hosses--if ye
want to pay fer ridin'," added the farmer shrewdly. He was a good man,
but close, and never allowed a chance to make an honest cent slip by.

"All right, we'll ride," said Dick. "The horses may come in handy for
hauling the biplane,--and besides, we can't carry these ropes and hooks
if we walk."

So it was arranged; and a little later the party of four set off on
horseback, the farmer and Tom carrying the ropes and hooks, and Sam
keeping beside Dick, who looked a trifle pale in spite of his efforts to
appear all right. The knock-down blow from the flying machine had been
harder than the eldest Rover boy was willing to admit.

Rocker's Woods proved to be a large patch of scrub timber, all the large
trees having been cut down to feed the old saw-mill, which still stood
on the bank of a good-sized stream. The saw-mill had not been used for
nine years and the timber was gradually coming up once more.

"This is exactly the way thet airship tuk," said Peter Marley, as he
led the way. "An' as she wasn't runnin' very fast I guess she must
a-come down not very fur off."

"I hope so," answered Dick. "And I hope, too, she came down gently."

"Huh! How could she come down any other way? Ain't much to 'em, is
there, 'ceptin' sticks an' cloth."

"The engine weighs several hundred pounds."

"Gee shoo! Several hundred pounds! Say, if thet's so, it's great how
they kin stay up!" burst out the farmer in admiration. "Ain't no bird as
weighs as much as thet!"

As they advanced through the woods, all of the party looked to the right
and the left for some sign of the missing biplane.

"Here's a tree top down!" cried Tom, when they were close to the river
on which the old saw mill was located. "This looks as if it might have
been done by the machine."

"Gracious, I wonder if the airship went into the river!" burst out Sam.

"That might be a good thing, if it did," answered Dick. "It might save
it from being wrecked, and we might be able to tow it ashore."

In a moment more they came to a halt at the edge of the river, which was
broad and smooth at this point. In the middle the stream was ten to
twelve feet deep, and the bottom was of sand and smooth rocks.

"I don't see anything that looks like a flying machine," said Sam after
a long look around.

"Maybe after all it went over into the woods on the other side,"
returned Dick.

"That must be it," said Peter Marley. "I'm afraid we'll have to go up
the stream a bit to get across. We can't ford here."

"How far to a good ford?" asked Dick.

"About quarter o' a mile tudder side o' the old mill."

"Say, look over there!" cried Tom at this moment. "What does that look
like to you, Sam?"

He pointed with his hand, and all in the party gazed in the direction
indicated, a point close to the opposite shore, where some brushwood
overhung the river.

"Why that looks to me like one of the planes of the flying machine!"
cried the youngest Rover.

"Just what I thought," exclaimed Tom. "What do you say, Dick?"

"It certainly does look like one of the planes," answered the older
brother. "But don't be too sure, or we may be disappointed."

"Too bad we can't get over here," murmured Sam. "Supposing I swim it?"
he continued.

"No, don't bother, Sam," replied Dick. "We'll all go around by way of
the ford. You can't do anything alone anyway."

"But I might make sure if it was the machine," insisted Sam.

"Never mind; we want to get over there anyway--to continue the
search--if that isn't the machine."

Again Peter Marley led the way, along a trail that ran past the old
mill. The boys came close at his heels, and as they advanced Tom
questioned the farmer concerning the place.

"It belongs to a lumber company, but it's been closed up fer years,"
said Peter Marley. "Once in a while tramps hang out there, but thet's
all."

Presently they found themselves close to the mill, which was almost
ready to fall down from disuse and neglect. As they rode up Tom chanced
to glance towards a side window and was surprised to catch sight of a
man looking curiously at them. As soon as he saw that he was discovered
the man stepped out of sight.

"Well, I never!" gasped Tom. "Did you see him?"

"See who?" asked his brothers.

"That man at the window of the mill! Unless I am greatly mistaken it was
Josiah Crabtree!"




CHAPTER VI

TWO OLD ENEMIES


"Josiah Crabtree!" came simultaneously from Dick and Sam Rover.

"Yes," returned Tom.

"How can he be here, in this out-of-the-way place?" demanded Sam.

"You must be mistaken, Tom," came from the eldest Rover boy. "Old
Crabtree must be around Cedarville or in Ithaca. He would have no call
to come to a place like this."

"Did you say Josiah Crabtree?" questioned Peter Marley, curiously. All
had come to a halt on their horses.

"Yes," returned Tom quickly. "Do you know him?"

"I used to know him--fact is, he once stopped at my place to git a
ride--when he was a-visitin' thet old mill."

"Then he visits the mill!" exclaimed Dick. "Tom, you must have been
right."

"But why does he come here?" questioned Sam.

"Why as near as I know, some relative o' his'n used to have an interest
in the lumber company as run the mill," replied the farmer. "It was a
man named Foxwell. He's dead now. Maybe he left his share o' the place
to this man Crabtree. He was a teacher, wasn't he?"

"He was, years ago. Since then he has been a jailbird," answered Tom.

"A jailbird!"

"Yes, he was in jail for a number of years--and since he has been out he
has been trying his best to make trouble for us and for some of our
friends," went on Tom. "Come on, let's go after him, instead of
talking," he added, as he dismounted.

"That's the talk!" cried Sam. "The biplane can wait."

Dick was as willing as his brothers to go after the former teacher of
Putnam Hall, and leaving the farmer to take care of the horses, all
three ran up to the door of the old mill. It was unlocked, and one of
the hinges was broken, and it was an easy matter for them to push their
way into the building.

"Do you think Tad Sobber is with old Crabtree?" asked Sam, in a low
voice.

"It may be--since they were together when the girls saw them," returned
Dick.

"We ought to have armed ourselves," put in Tom. The boys had no weapons
of any kind.

"Here are some old barrel staves," said Tom. "They are better than
nothing." And he picked up a stave and his brothers followed suit.

With caution the three Rover boys advanced through the old mill, which,
because of the closed doors and dirty windows, was a gloomy place in
spite of the brightness of the day outside. All listened intently, but
not a sound reached their ears, excepting Mr. Marley's voice as he
talked to the restless horses.

"Supposing I call to him?" suggested Dick.

"It can't do any harm," answered Sam.

"Hello, Mr. Crabtree!" sang out Tom, without waiting for his brother.
"Where are you? Why don't you show yourself?"

All waited after this call. But no reply came back, and then Dick and
Sam called.

"He's a bit bashful," was Tom's grinning comment. "Wants to be hauled
out by the coattails, I guess. Come on, we'll soon locate him," and he
started forward.

"Be careful, Tom!" warned his elder brother. "He may set a trap for you!
You know he and Sobber are not to be trusted."

"I've got my eyes open," answered the fun-loving Rover sturdily.

With the barrel staves in hand, the three Rover boys advanced further
and further into the old mill, going from one room to another.
Occasionally they stumbled over bits of lumber and piles of sawdust, for
when the place had been shut down no attempt had been made to clean up.
Even some of the machinery had been left and this was now so rusted that
it was practically unfit for use.

"Say, Mr. Crabtree, why don't you show yourself?" called out Dick. "Are
you afraid?"

"You get out of here!" came the unexpected answer, from a small
toolroom, the door to which was split but tightly closed. "You Rovers
have no right on this property!"

The boys recognized the harsh and dictatorial voice of Josiah
Crabtree,--less pleasant now than it ever had been. They saw the former
teacher glaring at them from the split in the toolroom door.

"Mr. Crabtree, come out here and let us talk to you," said Dick, quietly
but firmly.

"I don't want to talk to you--I want you to leave these premises,"
snarled the man.

"Why should we leave?" asked Tom.

"Because this is my property."

"Your property?" cried Sam. "How so?"

"It was left to me by a distant relative. I won't have you on the
place."

"Mr. Crabtree, do you know that we can have you arrested?" said Dick,
sharply.

"Arrested? What for?"

"For the abduction of Mrs. Stanhope."

"I didn't abduct her--she went along of her own free will--I can prove
it."

"You know that statement is false. You carried her off against her
will--and did what you could to hypnotize her into marrying you. Mr.
Crabtree, you are a villain, and you ought to be returned to the prison
from which you came."

"Don't you dare to talk to me like that! Don't you dare!" fairly
shrieked Josiah Crabtree. "I know my rights, and some day I'll have the
law on you boys! You are responsible for my being sent to prison, and
but for you Mrs. Stanhope would have married me long ago. Now I want you
to leave these premises, and don't you dare to come back."

"Is Tad Sobber with you?" asked Tom.

"I am not here to answer questions, Tom Rover. I want to leave, and at
once."

"Mr. Crabtree, you listen to me," said Dick, stepping closer to the
crack in the door. "We are not afraid of you, and we want you and Tad
Sobber to know it. Were it not for the unpleasant publicity for Mrs.
Stanhope and her daughter, we'd have you in the lock-up inside of
twenty-four hours. We understand that you and Sobber have been
threatening the Stanhopes and the Lanings again, and also threatening
us. Now these threats have got to stop, and you have got to behave
yourself. If you don't behave yourself we are going to make it our
business to see that you are arrested, and we'll do our level best to
have you placed behind the bars for a long term of years."

"I--I--will--er----" stammered the former teacher of Putnam Hall. He did
not know how to proceed.

"Ah, don't you get scared!" came in a low voice from inside the
toolroom. "You know what the Rovers are."

"It must be Tad Sobber!" cried Tom. "Sobber, if you are in there why
don't you show yourself? Are you scared?"

"Of course he is scared," put in Sam.

"I'm not scared!" roared the bullying voice of the youth who had claimed
the fortune from Treasure Isle. "I am not scared and you know it."

"So you are really there, Sobber," put in Dick. "I thought as much.
Well, you heard what I said to Crabtree. It applies to you as well."

"Bah, Dick Rover, you can't scare me!" returned Tad Sobber savagely.
"Just now you think you are on top. But wait, that's all. That treasure
belongs to me and I mean to have it. And I mean to square up for the way
you have treated me, too."

"Are you two going to settle down here?" asked Sam, just for something
to say.

"That is none of your business," answered Josiah Crabtree. "Now I want
you to leave."

"Sobber, what has become of Jerry Koswell and Bart Larkspur?" asked
Dick, wishing to know something of those former good-for-nothing
students of Brill College.

"Never you mind what has become of them," answered Sobber. "But don't
think you have seen the last of them, Dick Rover. They haven't forgotten
how you treated them on Chesoque Island and elsewhere, and they mean to
even up that score."

"Are they here with you?"

"No. But I'm going to keep in touch with them, and some day we---- But
never mind now. Just you wait, that's all!" finished Tad Sobber,
meaningly.

"You'll try to play us foul,--just as you tried in the past," said
Dick. "Very well, I'll remember that, Sobber. And you remember what I
told you. The next time there is trouble we'll fight it out to the
bitter end."

There was a moment of silence.

"I want you to go away," said Josiah Crabtree, and there was just a
trace of nervousness in his tones. Evidently Dick's firm words had had
some effect.

"We are going," answered Dick. "Both of you remember what I said." And
then he motioned to his brothers; and all three left the old mill.

"Well, did ye find the feller ye was after?" queried Peter Marley, as
the boys came out to where he stood with the horses.

"We did," answered Dick, and nudged his brothers, to keep them quiet.
"It's Josiah Crabtree all right. And we had quite a talk with him."

"Wot's he going to do here?"

"He says it is his property--left to him by a distant relative. He
ordered us away."

"Must have been Foxwell left him the place. Is he going to start the
mill up ag'in?"

"He didn't say."

"If he's a jailbird I'll hate to see him in these parts," went on the
farmer soberly.

"Well, it won't hurt you to keep an eye on him, Mr. Marley," answered
Dick, and then, struck with a sudden idea, he continued: "And if you
see or hear anything wrong about him, will you do us the favor to let us
know at once, over the telephone, or otherwise? I'll pay you for the
calls."

"Sure I'll let you know--if I hear anything."

"I might as well tell you that he is down on us and down on some of our
friends, and he and a young fellow with him named Tad Sobber may try to
play us foul in some way. So, if you hear of anything strange, let us
know by all means."

"You can depend on it, I will," replied Peter Marley.

"And now to see if that really was the biplane!" cried Tom, when the
party was once more on horseback. "Let us try to forget old Crabtree and
Sobber. One trouble at a time is enough. If that was the flying machine,
I hope she isn't damaged much," he added, wistfully, for he had hoped to
get a good deal of sport out of sailing the _Dartaway_.

"Well, if that was the biplane, she must have landed in the river, and
that would break the shock some," said Sam, hopefully.

"Yes, especially if she came down on a slant," added Dick. "Maybe she
struck the water and scaled along like a clamshell."

Along the river they proceeded for quite a distance and then came to
the spot that the farmer said was the ford.

"Not so very shallow either," was Dick's comment. "Mr. Marley, are you
sure of the footing?"

"Yes, I've been across any number of times," was the answer. "I'll lead
the way. Be careful, fer the rocks is slippery an' if a hoss goes down
he might give ye a nasty tumble."

And then Peter Marley urged his steed into the river and one by one the
Rover boys followed him.




CHAPTER VII

THE RUNAWAY HORSES


In the middle of the river the ford was so deep that the water almost
touched the feet of the riders. But fortunately the current was
sluggish, so the horses managed to keep their footing. They were allowed
to take their own time, so it took several minutes to gain the opposite
shore.

"Well, I'm glad we are out of that," was Tom's comment, as they reached
a trail on the other bank.

"We'll have to endure it again, to get back," said Sam. "And what about
the biplane?"

"Just wait till we find the machine first," answered Dick, with a faint
smile. "You know the old saying, 'Don't count your chickens----'"

"Before they are fried," finished Tom, with a grin. "You see, somebody
might lift them from the henroost before you had a chance to cook them,"
he went on soberly.

"By gum! thet ain't no joke nuther!" burst in Peter Marley. "Many a
chicken I've lost through tramps an' wuthless niggers."

[Illustration: "THERE SHE IS!" BURST FROM TOM'S LIPS.--_Page_ 63. _Rover
Boys in the Air._]

They had to go around several walls of rocks and through a tangle of
brushwood, and then came to a small clearing where was located the
remains of a wood-cutter's hut. Not far beyond was the locality where
they had seen the object that looked like one of the biplane's wings.

It must be confessed that the hearts of the three boys beat a bit faster
as they drew closer. Would they find the flying machine, and if so,
would it be in serviceable condition or so smashed up as to be
worthless?

"There she is!" burst from Tom's lips, and he pointed out into the
water.

"Right down between half a dozen big rocks," added Sam. "Is she smashed
much? How about the engine, Dick?"

"The engine is there, but I can't tell if it's broken or not. We'll soon
find out."

The big biplane lay among some rocks and bushes, the latter overhanging
the water, which at this spot was less than two feet deep. By taking off
their shoes and socks, and rolling up their trousers, the boys were able
to wade out to the flying machine and make an inspection.

"One of the planes is broken," said Dick. "But as the bamboo poles are
merely split I think they can be repaired with some fine wire,--just as
we repair a split baseball bat."

"But the engine?" asked Sam, impatiently.

"I think the engine is all right--at least it looks all right to me. Of
course we can't be sure until we clean it up and try it."

"Then she must have struck the water on the slant and that must have
broken the shock," said Tom; and this surmise was undoubtedly correct,
for had the _Dartaway_ come down squarely on the rocks the planes and
the engine must have been broken to bits.

"Do you think we can get her ashore?" asked Sam.

"Sure we can, by the aid of the hooks and ropes, and the horses. But we
want to be careful how it's done. There is no sense in breaking the
machine still more."

"We might get some planks from that old hut and roll the wheels up on
them," suggested Tom. "I don't believe anybody uses the hut."

"No, that ain't been used for years," said Peter Marley. "Ye can tear
down the hull thing if ye want to."

The boys and the farmer set to work, and presently they had several
rough planks taken from the sides of the hut. They had the horses drag
these down to the water, and by hard work managed to get the planks
under the flying machine. As the planks were of wood they aided in
floating the affair.

"By jinks! I've got an idea!" suddenly cried Dick. "We'll want the
machine on the other side of the river. Why not build a raft and float
her over instead of bringing her ashore here? There is plenty of stuff
in that old hut."

"That's the ticket!" answered Tom. "Hurrah for a life on the rolling
deep!"

"It's a good idee," was the farmer's comment. "I was wonderin' how we'd
git over with the contraption. You kin keep on shovin' planks an' logs
under till she floats, an' tie them together with the ropes ye brung
along. A good idee."

It was not until noon that they had the so-called raft built and the
biplane fastened to it. The work had made them all hungry and they were
glad that they had brought along a substantial lunch. They sat down in
the shade of the woods to eat, washing the meal down with some water
from a spring back of the old hut,--or rather of what was now left of
the structure. While the boys ate they talked about Josiah Crabtree and
Tad Sobber and the others who were their enemies.

"They'll surely try to do something," said Dick. "But what it will be I
can't guess. We'll have to keep on guard."

"Who is going to go on the raft?" asked Sam. "It won't carry all of us."

"I'll pole it over," answered Dick. "The rest of you will have to go
around by the ford."

"Don't you want any help?" asked Tom.

"No, I think I can do it alone. If two of us got on the raft it might
sink too deep and get stuck on the rocks."

So it was arranged, and a few minutes later Dick set off. Peter Marley
had cut for him a slender but tough pole, which he was to use in shoving
the novel craft across the stream.

"Don't go overboard!" cried Sam.

"I'm going to take off the most of my clothing," answered the older
brother. "You can carry the things for me--and don't drop them at the
ford."

Soon Dick was on the way, standing behind the biplane and using the long
pole as best he could. He was in water up to his ankles and as the
planks were slippery he had to watch his footing. Once he came close to
going overboard but saved himself by clutching one of the wire stays of
the machine.

In the middle of the stream the current caught the raft and forced it
down the river for quite a distance. But Dick had expected this, and
kept his eyes on a sandy stretch still further below. He poled along
with vigor, and did what he could to avoid the rocks and shallows. Once
the raft caught fast, but soon he had it loose again, and a few minutes
later the sandy stretch was gained and he sent the raft shoreward with
all his force. It came up on the sand and there it stuck; and the voyage
was at an end. Somewhat out of breath, Dick sat down to await the coming
of the others.

"Safe and sound, eh?" cried Tom, as he galloped up from the ford. "Good
enough!"

"Now what's the next move?" asked Sam, who was at his brother's heels.

"We'll let the horses pull the whole concern up into the meadow,"
answered Dick. And as soon as Peter Marley arrived this was done, and
then the biplane was unfastened from the raft and rolled still further
inland, to a level, grassy field belonging to a farm of the vicinity.

The boys were anxious to learn if the engine of the flying machine was
in running order, and all set to work at once, drying and cleaning the
parts. Fortunately the gasoline tank had remained airtight. While Tom
looked over the spark plugs and Sam tried the oil feed, Dick adjusted
the carburetor and magneto.

"Now I guess we can try it," said the eldest Rover boy, at last. "But
we'll tie her down first," he added, with a grin.

"Yes, and good and hard this time," added Tom.

"Rope her to the raft," suggested Sam. "And drive a few stakes in the
ground, too," and this was done.

It was a wonder that none of the propeller blades had been broken, yet
such was a fact. They were scratched and nicked, but a coat of varnish
would soon remedy all that.

Dick turned on the spark, adjusted the gasoline feed, and then he and
Tom took hold of the propeller blades. Half a dozen turns proved
unavailing and the boys looked glumly at each other. Had the engine been
damaged after all?

"Give her another," said Dick, and this was done. Then the engine
suddenly responded, and there followed those gatling-gun like explosions
that set the horses to prancing wildly.

"Hi! hi! let up with thet racket!" yelled Peter Marley. "If ye don't
them hosses will run away!"

"All right, I'll stop her and you can take the horses up into the
field," answered Dick.

He sprang to the front of the biplane to stop the engine, but ere he
could do so one of the horses broke away and galloped madly away in the
direction of the woods. Then another followed.

"There they go!" bawled the farmer, lustily. "Stop 'em!"

Sam and Tom leaped to do as bidden. But they were too late, and so was
Peter Marley. Across the field dashed the horses, badly frightened by
the noise, and in a few seconds they disappeared into the timber.

"Well, by gum! Now what's to be did?" asked the farmer helplessly.

"Let's go after 'em!" answered Tom, running for the horse he had ridden.
"We ought to be able to catch them, Mr. Marley. Dick and Sam can stay
here."

"All right, we'll try it," answered the farmer. "But them critters is
powerful runners, I can tell ye thet! That black don't like no better
fun than to run away."

"Take care of yourself, Tom," called Dick, who had now stopped the
engine. And then he and Sam watched their brother and the farmer as they
went riding away at top speed after the runaway steeds.

"Well, anyway, the engine seems to be O. K.," remarked Sam, after the
others had disappeared. "And the propellers go around like circular
saws. Now all we've got to do is to have those bamboo sticks bound up,
or replaced by new ones. Wouldn't it be great if we could go home in
this machine!" he added, enthusiastically.

The boys inspected the split poles and the canvas, which had been
punctured in several places, and then tried the engine once more.

"Makes a lot of noise," was Sam's comment. "You'd think it was half a
dozen Fourths of July rolled into one."

Presently they saw a farmer approaching, accompanied by two boys. The
farmer had a shotgun in his hands, and each of the boys carried a club.

"Wot's this noise about, an' wot's that thing?" demanded the farmer, and
he showed his nervousness by the way he handled his gun.

"This is an airship," answered Dick, pleasantly. "I was trying the
engine, that's all."

"Gosh all hemlock! An airship, eh? I thought it was a company o'
soldiers firin' their rifles! Wot be you a'doin' here in my pasture
lot?"

"Is this your lot?"

"It sure is, an' has been for forty years."

"We came here with Mr. Marley, of Rayville, to get the machine. It got
away from us and landed in the river. We dragged it over here,"
explained Dick. "We'll make it right with you for using the lot," he
added, with a smile.

"Oh, so thet's it, eh? Well, you're welcome to use the lot," said John
Snubble. "I'm glad o' the chanct to see an airship. Boys, this is one of
them airships you read about in the papers," he went on to his two sons.
"Ain't no danger o' an explosion, is there?" he asked anxiously, as he
slowly drew closer.

"I don't think so," answered Dick. And then he explained to Mr. Snubble
how the two horses had become frightened and run away, and how Mr.
Marley and Tom had gone after the runaway steeds.

"It's too bad it's broke," said one of the farmer's sons. "I'd like to
see her go up."

"So would I," added the other.

"Perhaps you'll see her go up when she's mended," said Sam.

"If this is your farm, could you rent me a shed in which to store this
biplane until she is mended?" said Dick, to the farmer.

"Maybe I can," was the slow answer. "But we'd have to keep the thing out
o' sight o' the hosses an' cattle, or they'd cut up wuss nor them hoses
did wot run away," the man added soberly.




CHAPTER VIII

TRIAL FLIGHTS


It was a full hour before Tom and Peter Marley came back and even then
they did not bring the runaway horses in the field where the biplane was
located.

"Won't take no more chances," said the farmer. "I kin tie 'em down here
on the edge o' the woods jest as well." And this was done.

"Well, we may as well store the machine here for the present," said
Dick. "We'll have to get some piano wire for those broken poles."

"Aren't you going to try to take it home?" asked Tom, in surprise.

"What's the use? This is a good field to fly from. We can mend the
_Dartaway_ here and then, if Captain Colby is willing, he can sail her
from here to our farm."

A big wagon shed was cleaned out, and John Snubble and his sons aided
the others in rolling the biplane under the roof. Some old blankets were
thrown over the engine.

"Do you think she'd be safe here?" whispered Dick, to Peter Marley.

"She will be so far as Snubble is concerned," said the farmer. "He'll
leave her alone, an' so will his sons. But some outsider may come an'
fool with her."

"Well, we've got to take that chance," returned the eldest Rover boy.
"We won't leave the biplane here any longer than necessary."

It was not until nearly supper time that the boys got back to Rayville.
Here Peter Marley was paid for what he had done, and then the youths
lost no time in running out their automobile and going home.

The next day they telegraphed to the aviator who was to give them
lessons in sailing the _Dartaway_, and he came as soon as he could. He
listened with much interest to what the lads had to tell him.

"Well, it was certainly a great try-out!" he declared. "It proves that
the _Dartaway_ is a well-balanced machine, and that means much."

He had brought with him the necessary wire for repairs, and soon all
were on the way to the Snubble farm, taking a road that would land them
directly at the door.

"Glad you come!" cried John Snubble on seeing the boys. "Going to take
the machine right away, ain't you?"

"We hope to," answered Dick. "Why?" For he saw that the farmer had
something on his mind.

"Might have been burnt up last night, that's why."

"Burnt up!" cried Tom. "How?"

"Heard a noise outside about eleven o'clock--my wife did, she ain't well
an' don't sleep good. I came down with my shotgun, thinkin' chicken
thieves might be around. I heard somebuddy at the flyin' machine and
sneaked up to see who it was. Hang my skin if a young feller wasn't
there with a lighted candle an' some loose hay, and wantin' to start a
fire close to the gasoline tank! I gave a yell, an' he dropped the
candle and legged it for dear life."

"Why didn't you stop him, or shoot him?" queried Sam.

"I was too excited, fer the candle dropped into the hay an' it begun to
blaze up. I stamped the fire out, an' by that time the feller was out o'
sight."

"He must have wanted to blow the biplane up!" exclaimed Captain Colby.

"He sure did, an' he might have burnt up the shed an' the barn, an' the
house, too!" added John Snubble.

The three Rover boys looked at each other. The same thought was in the
mind of each.

"Tad Sobber!" murmured Sam.

"Sure as you're a foot high," added Tom. "Oh, what a mean thing to do!"

"He must have watched what we did, and then planned to wreck the
_Dartaway_," said Dick. "It's just like his meanness."

"Let's go down to the old mill after him," burst out Tom. "I'd like
nothing better than to wipe up the ground with him." And he clenched his
fists tightly.

"Humph! Do you think he'd show himself?" asked Sam. "Not much! He'd hide
where you couldn't find him. Now he and old Crabtree know we are around
they'll take good care not to get caught."

"We might burn down the old mill!" murmured Tom. "It would serve 'em
right, for all their meanness."

"Let it go," was Dick's advice. "Some day we'll catch both of them
red-handed at something, and then we can give 'em what's coming to 'em."

The matter was talked over with John Snubble and the aviator, and the
farmer said he would keep on guard against Sobber and Crabtree and
report to Dick if he found out anything unusual. Then the biplane was
brought forth, and Captain Colby made an examination.

"All these breaks can easily be mended," said the aviator. "We'll go to
work at once. Then I'll give the _Dartaway_ a little try-out, and if she
runs as she should I'll take her back to your home."

"Don't you want a passenger?" asked Sam and Tom in a breath.

"Why, do you want to go?"

"Sure!"

"I'm afraid I'll have to disappoint you. I want to try the machine
several times before I risk taking anybody up."

The Snubble boys were delighted to think they could see the _Dartaway_
fly and they assisted the others in making the necessary repairs. For
two hours all were very busy and then Captain Colby announced the
biplane in as good a condition as before the wild flight.

"Now I'll give her a short try-out," he said, and this was done. Up into
the air mounted the _Dartaway_ as gracefully as a bird, and all of the
boys clapped their hands in delight.

"By gum! beats the nation!" said one of the Snubble lads.

"It's grand! I'm going to save up for one!" added the other.

Around the field sailed Captain Colby and then made the figure eight
three times. Then he came down near the spot from which he had started.

"Couldn't be better," he declared. "I could take her a hundred miles if
I wished."

"Wish I could go up," said Sam wistfully.

"Your time will come pretty soon," added the aviator. "The flight to
your home will be a good test."

A little later the aviator arose again in the air, this time headed for
Valley Brook farm. The boys were also ready and started off immediately
in the automobile.

"Come again!" shouted the Snubble boys.

"We will," answered Dick. "Your field makes a dandy landing place."

Dick ran the automobile and put on good speed all the way home. As they
went along they watched the flight of the biplane, but soon the machine
passed from view.

"She certainly can sail!" cried Tom. "Oh, Dick, we'll have to take her
to Brill with us!"

"That's it!" cried Sam. "What's the use of leaving her behind? We can
sail after college hours."

"Yes, and think how quickly we could get over to Hope Seminary," went
on Tom. The place he mentioned was a young ladies' boarding school
located not many miles from Brill. Dora Stanhope went to Hope, and so
did the two Laning girls.

"We'll see about it," replied Dick, briefly. But the idea of taking the
flying machine to Brill pleased him as much as it did his brothers.

When they got home they found that Captain Colby had already arrived. He
and the _Dartaway_ were in the field back of the barn, and surrounding
the aviator were all the members of the Rover household.

"Well, boys, got back, eh?" cried Anderson Rover, as they rolled up in
the automobile.

"Hello, dad!" came from all three. And then they leaped to the ground to
greet their parent. All could not help but notice that he looked a
trifle pale and careworn.

"Was your trip a success?" asked Dick, in a low voice.

"I don't know yet--I hope so," answered the father. "Some business
matters have gotten pretty well twisted up. But never mind now. I see
your new machine can fly." And Anderson Rover smiled.

"Oh, she's a peach!" cried Tom slangily. "We expect to have the
greatest times ever in her!"

"Yes, but you must learn all about the biplane first," added the fond
father anxiously. "You mustn't think of going up until you are sure of
what you are doing."

"Dat am suttenly de greatest bird wot I most eber see!" declared Aleck
Pop solemnly. "If I hadn't dun see it wid my own eyes I wouldn't nebber
believe it nohow!"

"That's a fact," added Jack Ness. "When the boys go up in it there won't
be no holdin' 'em in."

"We're going to take you up, first thing, Jack," said Tom, with a wink
at his brothers.

"Me? Not much!" cried the hired man. "I wasn't built to fly, not me!"
And he began to back away in alarm.

After dinner Captain Colby made another trial flight, and then gave the
three boys a lesson in the manipulation of the biplane, showing them
just how to regulate the engine while running, how to balance the
machine, how to steer, and how to make various turns.

"Do you ride bicycles?" he asked.

"We do, and have for years," answered Dick.

"And do you swim?"

"Of course," came from all of the lads.

"Then just remember how you felt when you first tried to ride a wheel
and when you first tried to swim. You got excited, didn't you? And when
you thought the wheel was going over you gave it a wild twist that did
send you over, and when you thought you were going to drown you thrashed
around in a way that only made matters worse. Well, that's a lesson to
remember in running a flying machine. Don't get excited and lose your
presence of mind, or it may cost you your life. Keep cool, act quickly,
but don't overdo a thing. If the machine is tipping a little to one
side, don't get excited and throw it clean over the other way. And don't
try to make any sharp turns until you know your machine thoroughly."

Then he had them watch him while making several flights close to the
ground, and told them exactly what he was going to do. This lasted for
two days.

"Running an auto and a bicycle will help you," he said. "But sailing a
biplane is, after all, a science in itself. But you'll learn--I see that
by the way you take hold."

There had been a slight breeze blowing during the third afternoon, but
towards sunset this went down, and then the aviator said that Dick might
try a short flight, over a cornfield that was close by.

"Don't go too high," he cautioned. "And if you feel the biplane turning
over try to jump clear of the engine, so it can't crush you."

It must be confessed that Dick's heart beat loudly as he took his seat
in the flying machine. It was one thing to talk about going up and quite
another to really fly. He realized the danger far more than did
merry-hearted Tom, or even Sam. But he was not going to show the white
feather.

The engine was started, the others holding the machine back. Dick
grasped the steering wheel and put his feet on the pedals.

"All ready?" asked Captain Colby.

"Yes. Let go."

"Now be careful. Take it easy,--and keep over the cornfield," said the
captain. "And if you turn, make a wide circle." He thought a tumble
among the corn might not be as bad as one in an open field where the
ground was hard.

Those on the ground let go, and with a rush and a whirr the _Dartaway_
sped forward over the ground. Then Dick shifted the elevation rudder,
and up into the air rushed the biplane, gathering speed at every
revolution of the propellers.

The eldest Rover boy was in the air at last!




CHAPTER IX

THE NEW ARRIVAL


"Say, that's great!"

"Be careful, Dick! Don't try too much!"

"He made a very good start," came from Captain Colby, who was watching
the progress of the biplane closely.

Over the cornfield sailed the _Dartaway_ with Dick Rover the sole
occupant. He was up about fifty feet in the air and presently he went
still higher.

"He's making the turn!" cried Sam. "Just look at him coming around!"

"Here he comes back!" exclaimed Tom. "Hurrah! Who says Dick can't fly?
Why, he's flying like a veteran!"

"Very good, so far," murmured Captain Colby. "If only he keeps his wits
about him he'll be all right."

"Trust Dick to do that," answered Sam. "He knows what he is doing, every
time."

The biplane had now reached a point close to where the three stood in
the field. All expected Dick to come down, but he did not. Instead, he
made another graceful turn to the left, and started over the cornfield a
second time.

"I wish the others could see him," murmured Tom. They had not told the
folks in the house about the trial flights for fear of scaring them.
Everybody thought the boys would not try to fly for at least a week.

Four times did Dick sail around the cornfield, the last time making such
a wide circle that he went directly over the barn and the wagon shed.
Then he shut off the engine and glided slowly to earth, coming down in
the middle of the field with scarcely a jar.

"By the great clam chowder of Pocahontas!" cried Tom, rushing up and
helping him out of the machine. "Dick, it was fine! Couldn't have been
better!"

"It was immense!" put in Sam. "You made the turns beautifully."

"It was very well done," added Captain Colby. "If you do as well in the
future you will have no cause to fear. As far as you are concerned, I
reckon the worst is over."

"How did it feel to be up in the air?" queried Sam.

"Oh, I felt kind of funny in my head for a few seconds," answered the
older brother. "But I knew I had to pull myself together and I did.
After that it was only a question of watching everything closely."

"Now I guess it's my turn, isn't it?" asked Tom, impatiently.

"If you feel equal to it," answered the captain.

"Sure thing."

Once more the biplane was gotten ready, and with another rush and a
whizz the _Dartaway_ shot into the air. For a moment, as the machine
wobbled from side to side, it looked as if Tom would have an accident,
and his brothers gave a shiver. But then he managed to steady the
machine and over the cornfield he flew, and around in a big circle
twice. Then he made a still larger turn, well up in the air, and in a
few seconds more was sailing over the barn and then over the Rover home!

"Gracious, that's Tom!" murmured Sam. "Always bound to go the limit!"

The noise of the engine caused those in the house to rush out and look
at the machine.

"Who is running it, that aviator?" queried Mrs. Rover.

"No, it's Tom," replied her husband.

"Tom!" burst out Anderson Rover. "Impossible! Why he doesn't know
enough about it yet."

"He'll be killed!" moaned Mrs. Rover. "Oh, what a daring boy!" And she
began to wring her hands in despair.

Over the house flew the biplane, and then made another turn and came
back. Then came sudden silence.

"Something is wrong!" cried Anderson Rover. "The engine has stopped
working!"

"He's coming down like a bird!" exclaimed Aleck Pop. "Now jess to look
at dat!"

As he spoke the biplane glided slowly to the ground, landing near the
barn. All rushed to the spot. There sat Tom grinning broadly.

"How was that?" he asked coolly. "Wasn't that a dandy initial flight?"

"Tom! Tom!" cried his aunt. "You'll kill me with your daring! Are you
hurt? Did something break?"

"No, I'm not hurt, aunty, and nothing broke," he answered. "Oh, it was
immense! I could have stayed up an hour if I had wanted to."

"Very good--very good indeed!" said Captain Colby. "You took a risk in
flying over the house, but as nothing went wrong we won't say anything
about that."

"Now it's my turn!" cried Sam.

"Has Dick been up?" queried his father.

"Yes, and he made a splendid flight too," answered Tom. "Oh, dad, your
sons are born aviators."

"Perhaps. But, Sam, do be careful! Don't try to fly so high at first,"
pleaded Anderson Rover.

"I'll be careful, dad," answered his youngest offspring.

All remained in the field to watch the flight of the youngest Rover. Sam
was a little pale, but just as determined as his brothers had been to
succeed. He looked over the biplane carefully, then took his seat, and
told them to start the propellers.

Once more the _Dartaway_ arose, and as it did Mrs. Rover could not
repress a shudder, for Sam was very dear to her, because he was her dead
sister's youngest child, and she had never had any children of her own.

But her fears were groundless, for Sam sailed over the cornfield just as
well as had Dick. He did not fly very high, but he kept in the air
nearly ten minutes, which was longer than had either of the others. When
he came down he did so with a little bump, but this was not enough to
hurt anything.

"It's the best ever!" was Sam's comment, when the others gathered
around. "Beats autoing all hollow!"

"Wasn't you scared, Massa Sam?" asked Aleck, who had watched the flight
with wildly-rolling eyes.

"Not in the least, Aleck, after once I got started. Just when I went up
I had a little chill down my backbone, that's all."

"Glory to heaben! Say, yo' know wot I think? I think dare ain't nuffin
wot you Rober boys can't natually do, dat's wot!" And with this comment
Aleck shuffled off to his work.

"Every one of you did well," was Captain Colby's comment. He turned to
Anderson Rover. "You can be proud of your sons, sir. They handled the
machine in splendid shape."

"Yes, but I want you to watch them closely, Captain," answered Mr.
Rover. "Teach them all there is to know."

"I'll teach them all I know myself," answered the aviator.

That evening the boys could talk of nothing but aviation, and many were
their plans for flights in the _Dartaway_. All wanted Captain Colby to
tell them if the biplane could carry three persons.

"I hardly think so," answered the aviator. "It will carry two, though,
that I am sure of."

"Well, if it will carry two men it ought to carry three boys," insisted
Sam.

"The best way to find out is to try it," went on the captain. "So long
as you run with care, nothing can happen to you because of the extra
load. Of course if the weight is too heavy the biplane won't go up, or
if it does, it won't stay up."

The following day came a telegraph message from one of the old Putnam
Hall pupils, Hans Mueller. He sent word that he would be in that
vicinity and would call on the Rovers.

"Good for Hans!" cried Tom, who scented fun. "Maybe we can take him up
in the _Dartaway_."

"Hans would be scared stiff," returned Dick.

"It would take all the starch out of him," said Sam.

"In that case, how could he be scared stiff?" asked Tom, dryly.

It was arranged that Sam should run down to the depot with the auto for
the German youth. In the meantime Captain Colby and the other boys got
out the _Dartaway_ and prepared for more trial flights. Then Dick went
up and remained in the air for twelve minutes, making a number of turns
that were very graceful, and taking a little trip over the woods back of
the farm.

"It's a sport that can't be beat, Tom," he said, on coming down. "I
believe everybody will be getting a flying machine before long--just as
folks have been getting autos."

The supply of gasoline had been replenished and the lubricating oil
renewed, and then Tom went up. He flew around the cornfield twice, then
headed in the direction of Oak Run.

"I guess he has gone off to meet Sam and Hans," said Dick. "I heard the
train go through and they must be on the way here by now."

"Your brother certainly takes chances," replied Captain Colby.

"He always did. Tom acts first and thinks afterwards,--but he usually
comes out on top," added Dick, loyally.

In the meantime Sam had reached the depot at Oak Run just as the train
came in. He immediately espied Hans Mueller, dress-suit case in hand,
and ran to meet him.

"Hello, Hans, old boy!" he exclaimed. "Glad to see you." And he shook
hands cordially.

"Is dot you, Sam?" replied the German youth, who, although he had been
in this country quite some time, still found a difficulty in mastering
the language. "I vos certainly glad to meet you. How vas der udder
poys?"

"Oh, Tom and Dick are first rate. They couldn't come down just now, for
they are busy with our new biplane."

"A biplane, eh? Vot is dot, some kind of a saw-mill alretty?"

"No, Hans, a flying machine. Hop in, and you'll soon be at the farm and
then you can look it over." And Sam led the way to the automobile, threw
the dress-suit case in the tonneau, and assisted the German youth to a
seat in front.

"A flying machine!" cried Hans, as they started off. "By chimanatics!
Vot you poys going to git next?"

"I don't know."

"First you get a houseboat, den an autermobile, den a steam yachts, und
bicycles, und now it vos a flying machine. Vot you do mid him, Sam?"

"We are learning to fly."

"Vot! you going up by der sky in him?" cried the German youth, aghast.

"Of course--and you can go up with us too."

"Me? Me go up in a airship? Not on your neckties, Sam Rofer! I got too
much regart for my neck alretty yet! Ven I fly I valk on der groundt und
do it, yah!"

"Oh, it's dead easy when you know how, Hans."

"Dead, hey? Chust vot I dink, Sam--put I ton't vonts to pe dead, not
chust yet!"

They soon passed over the Swift River and through Dexter's Corners and
came out on the highway leading to the farm. Looking up into the sky,
Hans suddenly saw something unusual approaching.

"Look, look, Sam!" he bawled. "Vot is dot?"

"Oh, that must be our biplane!" answered Sam. "Yes, it is! Dick or Tom
must be running it. Isn't it great, Hans?"

"_Du meine zeit!_" groaned the German youth. "Of Dick or Dom be in dot
he preaks his neck sure! Tole him to come town, Sam!"

Sam did not answer, but slowed up the automobile, to better watch the
flight of the biplane. Tom was making a graceful curve, so that he might
pass directly over the machine below.

"Hello, Hans!" he cried gaily, and waved his hand, for the noise of the
engine drowned out his oral salute. Then with a rush the biplane sailed
directly over the automobile.

"Sthop! Ton't hit me!" yelled poor Hans, and badly frightened he ducked
his head, although the flying machine was fully twenty-five feet above
him.

Then Tom made another wide circle and again approached the automobile.
But this time he was sailing lower, and even Sam grew uneasy.

"Go up!" he yelled to his brother, and Tom tried to obey. But for some
reason, the biplane refused to respond to the rudder, and with a rush
and a roar it came directly for the automobile and its occupants!




CHAPTER X

FUN WITH OLD RICKS


It was a moment of extreme peril. Sam brought the automobile to a stop.
Had the roadway been wider he might have sheered to one side, but the
highway was too narrow for that, and with a ditch on either side, to
carry off rain water, he did not want to take a chance of going over.

"Go pack! Go pack!" shrieked Hans Mueller. He was crouching down,
looking with staring eyes through the lowered wind shield of the touring
car.

Suddenly Sam acted. While the biplane was still a hundred feet away he
threw his lever into the reverse and allowed the gears to connect with
the engine. Then the automobile began to move backwards, slowly at first
and then faster and faster, as the youngest Rover put on the power.

"He's coming! He's coming! Ve peen busted up in a minit!" roared Hans,
who was shaking as with the ague. "Oh, vy tidn't I sthay home ven I
come to pay dis visit!"

The biplane had slowed down, for Tom had shut off the engine. But the
_Dartaway_ still had headway enough to catch up to the automobile and it
came up like some bird of ill-omen, that made even stout-hearted Sam
quail. But he stuck to his post, sending the automobile backward as fast
as he dared. He knew the roadway behind was straight, so he simply
steered by keeping the wheel as it was.

"Tom, Tom, can't you do something?" he yelled. "Turn her aside!"

"I'm trying!" yelled back his brother. "The steering outfit is jammed!"

Backward went the automobile and on and on came the big biplane, until
the forward part of the machine was almost over the hood of the touring
car.

"Maybe you had better jump out!" cried Sam to Hans.

But even as he spoke there came a sudden snap from the flying machine. A
caught wire had released itself. At once the biplane could be steered
again, and with a dexterous twist of the wheel and a deflection of one
of the tips, Tom brought it around. Over a rail fence it sailed, to
land gracefully in the open field beyond. Then Sam stopped the
automobile.

"Well!" came from the youngest Rover. And that single word meant a good
deal.

"Hope I didn't scare you to death," sang out Tom, as he climbed from his
seat. "Hans, did you get heart failure?"

"Oh, Dom! Dom! vot for you do him?" asked the German youth, in a voice
he tried in vain to steady. "I dink sure you vos going to cut off our
heads off alretty!"

"It was the steering outfit did it," explained Tom. "I'm awfully sorry I
scared you. I was scared myself. I was going to fly over you and then go
back when all at once I found I couldn't budge the rudders. Then I got
alarmed, thinking the machine might turn turtle on me, so I shut off the
engine, intending to glide to earth. But I didn't want to glide right
into the auto. Sam, it's a good thing you thought to run backwards. If
you hadn't there would have been a smash-up sure!"

"So dot is der new flying machine," remarked Hans, as he walked into the
field to inspect the _Dartaway_. "Mine gracious! she vos almost so pig
like a house!"

"Want to go up, Hansy, old boy?" queried Tom.

"Not for a dousand tollers, Dom! No, not for a million!"

"You'll like it, Hans, when you get used to it."

"No, sir; nixy!" returned the German youth firmly. "I sthay py der
ground on. You fellers can fly und I vatch you, yah!"

"How are you going to get the machine back?" asked Sam.

"Sail her back," answered his brother promptly. "But I'll have to look
at that steering apparatus first--and you'll have to help me start."

"Better let Captain Colby inspect it first," advised Sam.

But Tom did not want to wait, and so he and his brother looked over the
flying machine and soon found out what had gone wrong, and fixed it, so
that the same accident might not occur again. Then Tom got in, and Sam
and Hans started the propellers, and away sailed the youth in a manner
that made the German lad stare in amazement.

"Dot's fine!" was Hans's comment. "Say, Dom, he peen a regular
aviadventurer, hey?"

"What's that, Hans?"

"Dom, he peen a regular aviadventurer, or vot you call him?"

"Oh, you mean aviator."

"Yah, dot's him. He peen von sure!"

"Your word was O. K., Hans," was Sam's comment. "Tom is certainly an air
adventurer!"

The two boys got into the automobile once more and were soon at the
Rover homestead, where Hans was warmly greeted by the others, all but
Captain Colby knowing him well. Tom had already arrived and the captain
was inspecting the biplane with care.

"Such things will happen, especially with a new and stiff machine," said
the old aviator. "All you can do is to watch out, and look over the
machine with care every time you plan a flight."

Hans had much news of interest to tell about the boys who were still at
Putnam Hall and about Captain Putnam and George Strong, the head
teacher. He had also seen Mr. and Mrs. Laning, the parents of Nellie and
Grace, and had heard something of the latest trouble with Tad Sobber and
Josiah Crabtree.

"Vy ton't you got dem arrested?" he asked, when he was told that the
evil-disposed pair were in that vicinity.

"We don't want the notoriety," said Dick. "If we had them locked up
they'd be sure to drag Mrs. Stanhope and the girls into court. We are
willing to let them alone if they will only let us alone."

Captain Colby remained at the farm a week and during that time gave the
Rover boys as much instruction as possible in the art of flying in
general and the art of managing the biplane in particular. He had
brought with him several books on flying and recommended that these be
read carefully.

"You all seem to take to it naturally," he said. "I don't believe you'll
have any trouble excepting on rare occasions--and every person who goes
up is bound to have that."

After the captain left the boys took several flights, some of them quite
long. They sailed over Dexter's Corners and the railroad station of Oak
Run, and at the latter place nearly scared old Ricks, the stationmaster,
into a fit, by swooping down close to where he was standing. Dick also
made a flight to the Marley place, and visited the Snubble homestead.

"What did you find out?" asked Sam, when he came back from the
last-named trip.

"Sobber and Crabtree have left the old mill," answered Dick. "The
Snubble boys were over there twice and they couldn't see a sign of
anybody."

"Have they any idea where they went to?" asked Tom.

"No. They said Crabtree sold the mill property."

"Besser you look out for dem scalavags," was the advice from Hans. "I
vouldn't drust dem mit mine eyes open alretty!"

"Oh, we're on the watch!" declared Tom.

The next day the German youth had to leave, and all the boys went down
to the railroad station in the touring car to see him off. Old Ricks was
there and he glared souring at the Rovers when he saw them.

"I guess he didn't like that flying affair," was Sam's comment.

"Oh, he's thinking of the time Tom put the cannon cracker in the bonfire
and made him think some dynamite had gone off," returned Dick, with a
grin.

"Or the time Tom gave him the cigar that turned into a snake!" went on
Sam, with a laugh.

"Get out of the way! Get out of the way, you boys!" cried the old
stationmaster, as he brushed past, hitting Tom in the knee with a suit
case he was carrying. The train that carried Hans had rolled away,
leaving Ricks and the Rovers alone on the little platform.

"Why, Mr. Ricks, what's your rush?" asked Tom, sweetly. "Going to a
wedding?"

"No, I ain't going to no wedding!" grunted old Ricks. "I don't want you
young fellers to git in my way, that's all."

"Maybe you have to testify in that case in court," went on Tom, with a
wink at his brother.

"Ain't got to testify in no court."

"Why, you're in that case--I read all about it in the papers!" cried
Tom.

"Me in a case in court?" asked old Ricks, suspiciously.

"Sure. It was a terrible trouble, wasn't it?" went on Tom. "I am mighty
sorry for you, really I am, Mr. Ricks."

Now as it chanced, Mr. Ricks had had some trouble with a neighbor over a
fence that had blown down between the two properties. The neighbor had
threatened to sue him if he did not put the fence up again. The Rovers
knew nothing about this, but it had been in old Ricks's mind for a week.

"If anybody sues me he'll git the wust of it!" growled the stationmaster
savagely.

"It's a terrible mess, that's a fact," went on Tom. "The papers said he
had threatened to get after you with a shotgun!"

"A shotgun? After me?" exclaimed old Ricks, and turned slightly pale.

"And they say you poisoned the cat," put in Dick.

"And caught the dog and starved the poor animal to death," added Sam.

"It ain't so--I never teched his cat, nor his dog nuther!" roared old
Ricks. "He's a blamed fool, he is!"

"Hush! hush!" whispered Tom, solemnly. "Don't speak so harshly of the
dead."

"Dead!" exclaimed the startled Ricks. "Who's dead?"

"Didn't you know he was found on the railroad tracks dead?" asked the
fun-loving Rover. "Of course they say you let the freight train run over
him. But we know you wouldn't be so wicked, Mr. Ricks."

"Dead? On the tracks? Me let the train run over him?" half-whispered the
stationmaster. "I--I--didn't do it! Say, this is awful! Who told you
this?"

"Haven't you read the newspapers?" asked Dick.

"That comes for being too stingy to buy a morning paper," added Sam.

"Of course the local papers didn't dare to print the truth," said Tom.
"But you'll find a full account in the New York _Blizzard_ and the
Philadelphia _Bazoo_. Your picture on the front page, too, entitled,
'Did He Do It, or Did He Did It Not.'"

"Say, I ain't done nuthin', I tell ye!" almost shouted old Ricks, who
was too excited to realize that the boys were making fun of him. "If
them blamed city newspapers say I did I'll sue 'em fer damages, that's
wot I'll do. I ain't teched Ham Ludd, nor his cat, nor his dog nuther!
And it was the wind blew the fence down, I didn't tech that nuther!" He
paused to catch his breath, "Where was Ham killed? I didn't hear of
anybuddy gitting struck by a train."

"Oh, I don't know who the man was, or where he was struck," answered
Tom, as he started to walk away. "But they are after you, Mr. Ricks. If
I was you, I'd pack my valise and hike for California, or Sing Sing, or
some other place."

"I ain't going to run away, Tom Rover, and you can't make me," was the
wild reply. "I ain't teched Ham, nor his cat, nor his dog, nor the fence
nuther, I tell ye! It's an outrage to say so! I'll sue them newspapers
fer a million dollars damages!"

"I'd make it two millions," answered Tom, calmly, and then started for
the automobile, followed by his brothers.

"But see here," went on the stationmaster. "I want to know----"

"Sorry, but we haven't time now," put in Dick. "Hurry, Tom!" he
whispered.

"It's Ham Ludd coming!" added Sam. "Let's get out--before the fat's in
the fire!"

And off the three Rover boys ran to the automobile and were soon rolling
away from the railroad station. But they did not go far.

"I'm going back and watch the fun," said Tom, and leaped out, and ran up
behind the station, while his brothers followed him.




CHAPTER XI

OFF FOR BRILL COLLEGE


When old Ricks saw his neighbor approaching he could not at first
believe his eyes. Then he ran up to the man, who was a particularly sour
individual.

"Say, I thought you was dead," he gasped.

"Dead?" returned Ham Ludd. "Do I look like I was dead?" And he glared
savagely at Ricks. "I ain't dead, not by a jugful!"

"Humph! Well, if you ain't dead, mebbe you'll explain about that cat,
an' dog," went on old Ricks.

"Wot about 'em?"

"You told folks I poisoned the cat and starved the dog to death."

"I did not."

"You did--it was in the newspapers!" bawled old Ricks, commencing to
dance around.

"I didn't! Where's them newspapers?" asked Ham Ludd, also growing
excited.

"I ain't got 'em, but Tom Rover said----"

And then suddenly old Ricks stopped short. He was commencing to "smell a
mouse," as the saying is.

"Wot did Tom Rover say?" demanded Ham Ludd.

"Never mind wot he said," grumbled the stationmaster. "Only you be
careful o' wot you say about me in the future, Ham Ludd, thet's all!"

"Huh! I guess that Rover boy has been a'jokin' you ag'in, Ricky," said
Ludd, with a grin. "How about thet busted-up bonfire, an' that snaky
cigar? Ha! ha! he had you them times, didn't he?"

"You shet up, Ham Ludd!" roared the stationmaster. "Don't you say
another word!"

"I'll say all I please! An' you'll put up that fence, too, or I'll have
the law on ye!" retorted Ham Ludd; and then went on his way.

"Hang them Rover boys anyway!" muttered old Ricks, as he gritted his
teeth. "I'll be glad when they go off to college ag'in. Wish they would
stay away!" And he went about his work.

"Ricks and Ludd will have it in for each other from now on," remarked
Dick, as he and his brothers got into the automobile to go home.

"Yes, and he'll have it in for us--me especially," returned Tom, with a
broad grin. "Never mind; I can stand it," he added, carelessly.
Troubles, past or to come, never set heavily on that fun-loving youth's
shoulders.

The boys had given the biplane one trial in carrying two passengers,
Dick and Sam going up together while Captain Colby was present. On the
day following the departure of Hans, they rearranged the seats on the
_Dartaway_ and got ready to go up three strong, provided the biplane
would carry the load.

"I know she will do it if we get a more powerful engine," said Dick.

"Then we'll get the engine," returned Sam.

They made the start with care, all the others at the homestead being
present to witness the trial. The _Dartaway_ went up slowly, with Dick
in the center, at the wheel, and Sam on one side of him and Tom on the
other.

"Hurrah! we are going to make it!" cried Tom, as the biplane arose like
some big bird.

"It's a strain though," answered Dick. "We won't be able to fly very
high nor very long."

"But it's great to be up together!" murmured Sam.

They flew for nearly ten minutes, making wide circles and a big figure
eight. They went over the house and the barn, and in plain sight of
several surrounding farms, men, women and children coming out to look
at them. Once more the Rover boys were the talk of the whole
country-side.

"Ain't nothing they can't do," said one of the farmers living near. "If
they tackle a thing it's plumb bound to go through, every time!"

"It's because they are so full of grit and push," answered his wife.
"Wish our Jed was like 'em," she added, wistfully.

"Jed ain't never had no chanct, Mirandy."

"Boys like them Rovers make their own chances, Silas," she retorted.

That evening it was Tom who made a proposal that met with instant
approval from his brothers.

"Let's go to the college in the biplane," he said.

"Hurrah! just the cream!" returned Sam. "Say, won't the fellows stare
when they see us!"

"Very nice, but we can't very well fly all the way from here to Ashton,"
put in Dick, mentioning the town near which Brill College was located.

"Oh, I didn't mean that," explained Tom. "I meant to fly from Ashton to
Brill. We could ship the biplane to Ashton in secret, put it together on
the sly, and create a big sensation by coming down right on the college
campus."

"Tom, you're a wonder!" cried Sam. "It's the best plan ever! Oh, let's
do it!"

"Wonder where we could ship it to, so the other fellows wouldn't get on
to what was doing?" mused Dick.

"Why not ship it to Mr. Sanderson?" suggested Sam. The man he mentioned
was a farmer living some distance from the college. The boys had once
done the farmer's daughter Minnie a great favor, saving her from insults
at the hands of Jerry Koswell and Dudd Flockley.

"That's the talk!" cried Tom. "He'll take care of it and let us put it
together in one of his open fields. Then we can make the fellows at
Brill open their eyes."

The new idea pleased all the youths immensely, and the next day a long
letter of explanation was sent to Mr. Sanderson, and he was asked to
telegraph a reply. The biplane was taken apart and packed up for
transportation, and then the boys packed their trunks and dress-suit
cases, and got ready to "go back to the greasy grind," as Tom expressed
it.

It must not be supposed that the lads had forgotten to write to the
Stanhopes and the Lanings, and to their college friends. Numerous
letters had been mailed and about an equal number had been received. The
girls were all going to Hope, but one week later than the boys would
have to depart for Brill. Nothing more had been seen or heard of
Crabtree or Sobber, for which all were thankful.

"Here's a letter from William Philander Tubbs," said Tom. "I sent him a
letter just for fun, asking him the style in socks this fall. Listen to
his reply." And he read the following:

     "I have been making diligent inquiries about the shades in
     socks, my dearest Thomas, but the storekeepers seem to be a
     little undecided. Some think that Rambler Red will prevail
     while others favor Nile Green and a new shade called Baby's
     Breath. Personally I favor Baby's Breath and have purchased
     one dozen of that shade. If I get any more definite news
     about shades I will wire you, because I know what a dreadful
     thing it is not to have the shade that is really and truly
     fashionable."

"Three cheers for William Philander and his Baby's Breath socks!" cried
Sam. "He's the true and only artist!"

"Baby's Breath!" murmured Tom. "Now wouldn't that get your scalp-lock?"
And then there was a merry laugh all around.

There was likewise a letter from Max Spangler, and another from Stanley
Browne, stating they were already on their way to Brill. Then, just
before the boys were ready to leave home, came a letter from Songbird
Powell.

"I'll bet it's in verse," said Dick. "Songbird couldn't write prose to
save his life."

"We'll soon see," said Sam, who held the communication, and he tore it
open. "You win," he added, and then read the following, after the date
line:

          "My dearest boys
          I'm filled with joys
          To think that we
          Together shall be
          In a week or more!
          Oh, the fun in store!
          And also the work--
          Which we can't shirk--
          And the pleasant meetings,
          And pleasant greetings,----"

"He was thinking of Minnie Sanderson when he wrote that," interrupted
Tom.

"Sure thing," returned Dick; for all of the Rovers knew that the
would-be poet was deeply smitten with the farmer's daughter. He had
written several poems about her, and had also given her several
presents.

"Well, there are twelve pages of the doggerel," said Sam, glancing over
the sheets. "Here, you can read over my shoulders," and this was done,
amid much merriment. Songbird had but little news and promised to be at
college when they arrived.

"Oh, I hope the _Dartaway_ carries us there in good shape," murmured
Tom. "It will be an arrival worth remembering!"

Before he left home Dick had a long talk with his father and his Uncle
Randolph. When he rejoined his brothers he was unusually sober.

"What is it, dad's business affairs?" queried Sam.

"Yes, Sam."

"Are they in bad shape?" questioned Tom, quickly. "What's gone wrong?"

"It's something about those mining shares that dad and Uncle Randolph
invested in," answered Dick. "I'll give you the particulars later. They
don't want Aunt Martha to know about it, for it will only make her worry
without doing any good. I'm afraid dad and Uncle Randolph are in it
bad," went on Dick, soberly.

"Can't something be done?" asked Tom.

"Not just now. Dad is going to Chicago about it next week again."

"Does he and uncle stand to lose much?" questioned Sam.

"Yes, a good deal--more in fact than they can afford."

"Phew! That's too bad!" murmured the youngest Rover, and Tom shook his
head soberly, and forgot all about the parting jokes he had intended to
play on Aleck Pop and Jack Ness.

At last came the time for the three Rover boys to leave home. The
biplane had been shipped to Ashton by express and their trunks and suit
cases had been forwarded on their railroad tickets. They were going a
day ahead of time, and Mr. Sanderson had agreed to meet them and take
them to his home.

"Good bye, my boys," said the fond father, on parting. "Take good care
of yourselves."

"We will," they answered as they shook hands.

"Learn all you can," put in Randolph Rover.

"Take care and don't get into trouble," admonished Mrs. Rover, and then
she kissed them tenderly.

"Don't forget to let me know how matters go in Chicago, dad," whispered
Dick, to his parent.

"I'll remember, my son."

"And if I can aid you in any way, let me do it,--even if I have to leave
Brill," went on Dick.

"There is nothing to do at present, Dick. I must wait for that report."

Soon the boys were in the touring car, with Jack Ness to bring the
automobile back from the railroad station, he now being able to run the
machine. Dick was at the wheel. Tom had cranked up, and off they sped,
with a merry shout and with those left behind waving their hands.

"Let her go, Dick!" sang out Tom.

"Good bye!" yelled Sam.

"Good bye!" came back faintly from the homestead.

Then a turn of the road shut out the house from view. Once again the
Rover boys were off for college. Little did they dream of the strange
adventures in store for them.




CHAPTER XII

A GRAND ARRIVAL


"Glad to see you, boys! You're looking prime!"

It was the greeting of Mr. Sanderson, as the Rovers stepped from the
train at Ashton. The farmer was waiting at the platform with a
two-seated carriage to take them to his farm.

"How are you, Mr. Sanderson!" came from the three, and then all
continued in a chorus: "Did the biplane get here?"

"Something got here--two boxes an' several big bundles," answered the
farmer. "I had everything carted over to my place."

"Two boxes and four bundles," said Dick.

"Right you are. One of 'em putty heavy, too."

"That was the engine, Mr. Sanderson," vouchsafed Sam.

"Is that so! Well, times are sure changin', an' bymeby the hosses won't
be in it no more. So you calkerlate to fly over to the college."

"We do, if we can get the machine into shape," answered Tom. "It may be
that something got broke on the way and will have to be mended," he
added, anxiously.

"Well, we didn't break anything, Tom, take my word on that. If
anything's broke the railroad company done it."

The boys were soon seated in the carriage and Mr. Sanderson took up the
reins. As my old readers know, the farmer was proud of his horses and he
had good reason to be, for they started off in fine style, and presently
were passing everything on that long and somewhat dusty road.

"How is Miss Minnie?" asked Tom, on the way.

"Fust rate, Tom. She went drivin' yesterday with that young feller from
Brill that sprouts poetry."

"Oh, then Songbird has really arrived!" cried Tom.

"He has." Mr. Sanderson looked serious for a moment. "Say, is he any
good--or is he all--well, all poetry?"

"Songbird is one of the best and smartest boys in the college, Mr.
Sanderson," said Dick, bound to put in a good word for their chum. "He
likes to make up verses, but that isn't all he can do. Some day he'll be
a good business man."

"Well, I'm glad to hear that," answered the farmer; and the three Rover
boys knew he was thinking of his only daughter Minnie, and of the
attention Songbird Powell was paying to her.

It was not long before they came in sight of the Sanderson homestead,
pleasantly located in a grove of trees. Minnie Sanderson was on the
lookout for them--a round-faced, jolly young lady--and she waved her
hand as the carriage came to a halt.

"Why didn't you come in that wonderful airship!" she sang out gaily.
"I'm dying to see you fly!"

"Because you have the machine here!" answered Sam.

"Oh, we've only got some bundles, and they don't look a bit like a
flying machine," went on the girl. "But, say," she added, her cheeks
dimpling. "What a time I had yesterday, keeping your secret! Mr. Powell
took me out riding,"--she blushed a trifle--"and when we came back he
wanted to know what the bundles contained. I told him it was some kind
of machinery. He saw the canvas and said he guessed pa was going to put
up a windmill!"

"Thanks for keeping it dark!" cried Dick. "We want to surprise everybody
at Brill."

"You'll have to be careful of what you do then," went on the girl. "Some
of the young men have been around, and I--well, I don't like it."

"Who was around?" asked Tom.

"Mr. Flockley, for one," and Minnie bit her lip, for she had not
forgotten how that dudish collegian had once insulted her,--the time the
Rover boys had come to her rescue, as related in detail in "The Rover
Boys at College."

"Did he come to the house?" asked Sam.

"Oh, no, he merely walked through the orchard. But I guess he saw some
of the packages."

"He didn't speak to you, did he?" asked Dick, bluntly.

"I didn't give him the chance. When I saw him, I walked into the house,
and he didn't dare to follow me."

It was almost supper time, and the boys had arranged to remain at the
Sanderson homestead, instead of going to the rather poor hotel at
Ashton. They had a merry time with the others over the repast, and then,
even though it was late, they went down to the barn to inspect the boxes
and bundles comprising the _Dartaway_.

"Everything seems to be all right," said Dick. "We ought to be able to
put her together in a day, if we all work hard enough."

"We'll get up at six in the morning," said Sam.

So it was arranged, and Mr. Sanderson said he would call them. But this
was unnecessary, for all were up and downstairs before the appointed
hour, and before breakfast was served they had the boxes and bundles
open and the various portions of the biplane ready for assembling.

"Can't I help?" asked the farmer, who was much interested in what was
going on.

"You can help us lift the engine," said Dick. "That is rather heavy."

The boys and the farmer worked until five o'clock in the afternoon over
the biplane, knocking off a half hour for dinner. For that meal they had
same fried chicken and fresh vegetables, and an apple pie made by Minnie
which Tom declared was "a dream."

"We'll come and board with you," said Dick, to the girl. "This sort of
food goes away ahead of the college stuff; eh, boys?"

"Indeed it does!" cried Tom.

"Can't be beaten," put in Sam. And these compliments pleased the
farmer's daughter very much.

Gasoline was at hand and also oil, and soon the youths had the engine of
the biplane in working order. But it was not started until the
_Dartaway_ had been rolled off to the middle of a big field.

"I don't want to scare your horses and cattle," explained Dick, to the
farmer. "When the engine starts they'll think Fourth of July has
arrived."

Soon all was in readiness, and with a final inspection of the biplane,
Dick took his seat in the machine and called to his brothers to work the
propellers. Bang! bang! bang! went the cylinders, and around went the
big blades, faster and faster, until only a blur could be seen. Then
over the field shot the _Dartaway_ and up in the air.

"Oh, my, just to look at that!" gasped Minnie. "Just like a big bird!"

"Well, I'll be switched!" cried Mr. Sanderson. "An airship, sure as you
are born! I didn't think I'd live to see one! My! my! just to see that
thing a-sailin' through the air!"

Dick made the circuit of the field and then cut a figure eight. The
machine seemed to work perfectly, and when he came down he was well
satisfied.

"All aboard for Brill College!" he cried. "Through passage only! No
stopovers allowed!"

"Shall we sail over now, or wait until to-morrow?" asked Sam.

"Oh, come on now!" cried Tom, impatiently. "Lots of fellows will be on
the campus at this hour, and we can do some circling around before we
land."

"I'm willing," said Dick. "Who is to do the steering?"

"You do it--you're the oldest," said Sam.

"That's right," added Tom.

"I don't want all the glory," insisted Dick.

"You are not going to have," went on the fun-loving Rover. "See what
I've got for Sam and myself." And he brought out a mysterious package he
had brought from home. It contained two silken American flags and two
tin horns.

"We'll do the patriotic while you run the machine," said Sam.

"And I've got something else--but never mind what it is," went on Tom.

"No fireworks, Tom--they are too dangerous in a flying machine," warned
Dick, who knew his brother's love for things that made a noise.

"Nothing dangerous this time, Dick, I'll give you my word."

The _Dartaway_ was given another inspection and then staked to the
ground with a strong rope, fastened by a slip knot. Then the engine was
started up and the three lads clambered on board.

"Good bye!" they cried to the Sandersons.

"Good bye and good luck!" answered the farmer.

"Let us know how you arrive," added his daughter.

Then the knot in the rope was allowed to slide, and with a rush and a
whizz the biplane sped over the smooth ground and then soared into the
air. By the time Sam had hauled in the dangling rope, the flying
machine had left the Sanderson farm far behind.

"Oh, this is simply glorious!" cried Tom. He had his flag in one hand
and his horn in the other, and Sam was similarly equipped.

"Of course you know the way, Dick," said the youngest Rover.

"Oh, yes, it's easy. I'll simply follow the road. But I am going up a
bit," added Dick. "I don't want to scare any horses, or we may have some
damage suits to settle."

"The horses will have to get used to flying machines, just as they had
to get used to autos," was Sam's comment.

On and on flew the _Dartaway_, Dick managing the biplane as skillfully
as if he was a seasoned aviator. Over the farms and barns and houses
they sailed, creating much astonishment. The inhabitants came rushing
forth, some with milk pails, and women with dish cloths and towels in
their hands. One boy in his excitement shied a dipper at them, the
object falling short of its mark by several hundred yards.

"We are waking folks up," remarked Tom, as he tooted his horn and waved
his flag, and Sam followed suit. Then the fun-loving Rover placed his
horn under his arm and began to fumble at something in his pocket.

"I see Brill!" cried Sam, presently. "There is the main building!" And
he pointed with his hand.

"I see it," answered Dick. "Now for a few circles and a figure eight
before we come down. I hope they'll give us room to land."

In a few seconds more the various buildings belonging to the institution
of learning were in full view. Dick started up the engine with renewed
speed, thereby making more noise, and Tom and Sam added to the din by
blowing the horns with all their might. The two boys also waved the
flags.

The racket had the desired effect. From one building and another ran the
students and the members of the faculty, and also the hired help, and
all gazed up into the sky to learn what the noise meant.

"It's an airship!"

"There are three people on board!"

"Say, doesn't she sail along beautifully!"

"Wonder if they are sailing across the state."

"Maybe they are in the ocean-to-ocean race."

"They look like three boys! See, two of them are waving flags! Now what
do you think of that!"

"I'm going to get my spyglass," said one of the under teachers, and ran
to do so. In the meantime the _Dartaway_ came closer and circled slowly
over the main college building and the broad campus.

"Look! look!" cried several of the students. "What are they up to?"

From the bottom of the craft had suddenly burst a cluster of red, white
and blue tissue-paper streamers. These floated under and behind the
_Dartaway_, producing a beautiful effect. Then suddenly came floating
down through the air a quantity of many-colored confetti--tiny bits of
pretty paper that settled everywhere.

"The Rover boys!" cried the teacher who had brought out his spyglass.
"They are the three Rover boys!"

"The Rover boys!" cried Songbird Powell, who stood near. "Are you sure?"

"Yes."

"Hurrah!" shouted Stanley Browne. "Now, isn't that just like them?
Always up to something new and original."

"Three cheers for the Rover boys!" called out one of the seniors. And
the cheers were given with a will, while the _Dartaway_ continued for
some time to float over the college grounds and then came settling down
like some big white bird, in the very center of the campus.




CHAPTER XIII

SOME INTERESTING NEWS


Before the biplane had come to a complete standstill the students on the
campus made a rush and surrounded the three Rover boys.

"The grandest arrival I ever heard of!" cried Songbird Powell, as he
caught one after another by the hand. "I shall have to write some verses
about this."

"However did you manage it?" queried Stanley Browne. "I didn't know you
could run an aeroplane."

"It's out of sight alretty!" came from Max Spangler. "But we could see
it, yes!" he added hastily.

"Oh, we thought we'd give the fellows a little surprise," answered Dick
modestly. "We purchased the biplane some time ago. It's easy to run
after you get the knack of it."

"But carrying three!" went on Stanley. "I've heard of 'em carrying two
but not more than that."

"It's quite a load," said Tom. "We've got to have a more powerful engine
if we want to carry that many right along."

"And the streamers and confetti!" cried Songbird. "I'll bet those were
Tom's idea!"

"You're right," answered Dick.

"And he thought of the flags and horns, too," put in Sam, bound to place
the credit where it was due.

"I had to do something to let off steam," said Tom lightly. "Dick
wouldn't allow me to fire a bomb, or a cannon, or anything like that,"
he continued dryly.

During this talk many of the students and instructors commenced to
inspect the biplane, and soon the Rover boys were kept busy answering
questions.

"Well, young gentlemen, allow me to congratulate you on your successful
flight to this place!" said a pleasant voice, and turning the youths
found themselves confronted by Doctor John Wallington, the head of the
college. He smiled broadly as he shook hands. "This surely marks an
epoch in the history of Brill," he went on. "First arrival of students
by airship," and he turned to Professor Blackie, who was with him.

"You are right, sir," returned that instructor. "We'll have to make a
note of it." And this was done; and anybody going to Brill can see the
record in the "history book" of that famous institution.

"Look who's here!" suddenly cried a cheery voice, and Will Jackson,
usually called "Spud," because of his liking for potatoes, pushed his
way to the Rover boys' side. "I was upstairs dressing when you arrived,
but I saw it all from the window. Say, that flight couldn't be beaten.
You must have come about three miles a minute, eh? Puts me in mind of
the time I was caught in a Kansas cyclone. The wind carried me off my
feet, and landed me high up on the side of a big building, and there I
had to stick until the wind went down! Fact, and if you don't believe
it, some day I'll show you one of the bricks from that same building. I
keep it to sharpen my penknife on."

"The same old Spud!" cried Dick, while the others laughed outright.
"Telling a yarn before he even shakes hands. How are you?" And he gave
Will's hand a squeeze that made the story-teller wince.

"We'll have to have some place in which to store the biplane," said Sam
to Dr. Wallington. "Do you think we could put it in the boathouse for
the present--or in the shed of the gymnasium?"

"You may use the gymnasium shed, if you can get the machine inside,"
replied the head of the college. "I presume we'll have to build regular
hangars here,--if the students are going to own flying machines," he
added, with a smile.

"Well, they are good advertisements, Doctor," put in Tom. "Nothing like
being up-to-date, you know."

"Perhaps, Rover, perhaps. And it will be instructive to all here, to
watch you and your brothers manipulate the biplane. But do not let the
use of the machine interfere with your studies."

"Oh, we'll use it like we would our bicycles, or a motor boat, or an
auto," said Sam. "We came back to make a record for ourselves."

"I am glad to hear it, Samuel, very glad indeed." And then the good
doctor hurried away to attend to his official duties.

Some of the late arrivals wanted the Rover boys to give another
exhibition flight, and for their benefit Tom took a little sail by
himself, and then Sam went up for five minutes. Then the biplane was
rolled over to the big shed attached to the gymnasium,--a place usually
used for housing carriages and automobiles during athletic contests.
Here one end was cleaned out and the _Dartaway_ was rolled in, and the
engine was covered with a tarpaulin brought from the boathouse.

During the time that all this was being done, one student of Brill had
kept to himself, even though greatly interested in what was going on.
This was Dudd Flockley, the dudish youth who had once been the crony of
Jerry Koswell and Bart Larkspur. There was a sneer on his handsome face.

"Great work, eh, Dudd?" said Bob Grimes, one of the students, in
passing.

"I don't know what you mean," returned Flockley, coolly.

"Oh, yes you do, Dudd," retorted the other. "But I suppose it's sour
grapes for you," he added pointedly, for he was a friend to the Rovers
and knew something about the troubles of the past.

"Bah!" came from Dudd Flockley, and he turned and hurried away. "Now
those Rover boys have come back I suppose they'll try to lord it over
everybody, just as they did before. How I hate them! I wish I could do
something to get them in a hole!" He had forgotten completely the
kindness the Rover boys had shown him, and how they had gone to the head
of the college and pleaded for him, so that he had been allowed to
remain at Brill. Perhaps Flockley was not as wicked at heart as his
former college cronies, Larkspur and Koswell, but he was equally
ungrateful.

Soon the Rover boys and their chums were up in the dormitory where they
had their rooms. As before, Tom and Sam were together, in Number 25,
with Dick and Songbird in Number 26, and Stanley and the others not far
off.

"Home again!" sang out Tom, as he dropped in an easy chair. "My, but
this looks natural!" he added, glancing around.

"I want to tell you something," said Stanley, who had followed the three
brothers and Songbird into one of the rooms. "Maybe we'd better shut the
door," he added, significantly.

"Yes, he's got news," added Songbird. "Say, it beats the nation how some
fellows hold a grudge," he went on.

"What's the trouble now?" demanded Dick, quickly.

"Day before yesterday I was over to Ashton," answered Stanley, after the
door to the room had been closed and locked. "I went by the upper road
and I had to pass that new roadhouse, the place called the Red
Horseshoe. Well, who was sitting on the piazza but Jerry Koswell and
Bart Larkspur. They had been having a gay time, I guess, and both were
talking loudly. When they saw me they called to me to stop, and then
they asked me if you fellows had come back to Brill."

"What did you tell them?" asked Tom.

"I told them no, but that you were expected in a few days. Then both of
them began to brag, and said they had it in for all three of you
Rovers."

"Did they say what they intended to do?" questioned Tom.

"Not exactly, but Koswell intimated that if you didn't look out you
might be blown up."

"Blown up!" exclaimed Dick, and he thought instantly of what Tad Sobber
and Josiah Crabtree had said to Dora and Nellie.

"That's what he said. I wanted to find out what he meant, but Larkspur
stopped him from talking and told him to shut up. But, Dick, I feel sure
they mean something, and all of you fellows better be on your guard,"
added Stanley earnestly.

"This is surely getting interesting," said Tom. "First Sobber and old
Crabtree promise to blow us up and now Koswell and Larkspur propose the
same thing."

"They must be in league with each other!" cried Sam.

"It looks that way--especially after what happened on Casco Bay,"
returned Dick. And then he told Songbird and Stanley of the recent
happenings near the Rovers' home, and elsewhere.

"Well, my advice is, keep your eyes wide open all the time," said
Songbird. "Those fellows are desperate--their actions show it--and
they'll play you foul if they get half a chance."

"And to that advice let me add something more," said Stanley. "Don't
trust Dudd Flockley. He pretended to reform for a while, but behind it
all I think he is as bad as ever. If you gave him any information he may
carry it straight to those others."

"Thank you, Stanley, I'll remember that," said Dick.

"So will I," added Tom, and Sam nodded in approval.

"Well, to let you in behind the scenes," went on Dick, to Stanley and
Songbird, "I am not so much worried about ourselves as I am about Mrs.
Stanhope and Dora and the Lanings. Sobber and old Crabtree want that
fortune from Treasure Isle the worst way and they'll do anything to get
hold of it. Koswell and Larkspur are probably short of funds, and, as
they like to live high, they'll help Sobber and Crabtree all they
can,--for a rake-off of the proceeds."

"I reckon you are right," said Songbird. "But what do all of them mean
by blowing you sky high."

"That remains to be seen," said Sam.

"Or rather felt," added Tom, who had to have his little joke. "Maybe
they'll plant some dynamite under the college and blow us up!"

"Hardly that, Tom," returned his older brother. "But they may try some
kind of a dirty trick along those lines."

"Don't worry, boys, don't worry!" cried Songbird soothingly. "Let the
troubles of the future take care of themselves", and then he murmured
softly:

          "Though the skies be dark and dreary
            And hope be almost dead,
          And hearts are all so weary----"

            "Each one can go to bed!"

finished Tom. "A fine bit of poetry truly, Songbird, old sport."

"Who said anything about going to bed?" snorted the would-be poet. "I
had a finer line than that, Tom. It was--er--it was--a--er--a----Oh,
dear, you've quite driven it out of my head!"

"Never mind, it will come back day after yesterday, or before and
sooner," went on the fun-loving Rover blandly. "Now let us put away our
things and get ready for supper. I'm as hungry as a wolf in a famine."

"That's right," chimed in Sam. "Aeroplaning can give one a wonderful
appetite."

"It's the air," said Stanley.

That evening, after a good meal, the Rover boys had to tell of their
various experiences with the biplane. Not a student of Brill had ever
gone up in a flying machine although several had gone up in balloons at
county fairs and elsewhere. The Rovers had to promise to take up half a
dozen of their chums. So far during the fall, talk of football had
filled the air, but now all became flying and flying machines. Several
of the richer students promised themselves machines in the near future.

"That's the talk!" cried Tom, enthusiastically. "Then we can have some
races!"

"Maybe we can even get up an intercollegiate aeroplaning contest,"
remarked Sam.

"I'm afraid it's a little too early for that yet," answered Dick. "But
such contests may come one of these days."

The Rover boys were tired out from their day of labor and excitement and
ten o'clock found them in their rooms ready to go to bed. Tom and Sam
had started to take off their shoes when there came a faint tap on the
door and Bob Grimes appeared.

"Hello, Bob!" cried Tom. "What can I do for you?"

"Hush! not so loud!" whispered the other student, with a glance over his
shoulder down the corridor. "Listen, both of you," he went on
hurriedly. "Don't ask me any questions, but if you don't want your
biplane ruined be sure and guard it closely!" And having spoken thus,
Bob Grimes hurried down the corridor and out of sight.




CHAPTER XIV

THE BIRTHDAY FEAST


The two Rover brothers looked at each other in amazement, and for a
moment neither spoke.

"What do you suppose he meant?" asked Sam, presently.

"He meant just what he said," returned Tom. "I'm going to tell Dick,"
and he summoned his big brother without delay.

"I think I can piece this together," said Dick. "I saw Bob Grimes
talking to Dudd Flockley this afternoon, and again after supper. Most
likely Bob got on the trail of something Dudd thinks of doing. He
doesn't want to appear as a tattle-tale and at the same time he doesn't
want to see our machine ruined. So that's why he warned you in such a
queer fashion."

"You must be right," answered Tom. "What shall we do?"

"Nothing, Tom."

"Yes, but we don't want the machine ruined, or even tampered with!"
exclaimed Sam.

"I don't think anybody will touch it," went on the eldest Rover boy.
"After you came up here I got to thinking that maybe Flockley, or
Koswell, or Larkspur, or somebody else, might try to injure the
_Dartaway_, and so I went to see Filbury, the janitor, about it. His son
Abner is helping him around the dormitories, and I hired Abner for fifty
cents a night to sleep in the shed and guard the biplane. Abner has got
a shotgun, and he isn't afraid of anybody; so I reckon the _Dartaway_
will be perfectly safe."

"Good for you, Dick!" cried Tom. "Say, I hope if anybody does try to
injure the machine Abner gives him a dose of shot!"

"I told him not to shoot anybody unless it was necessary," answered
Dick. "But he may shoot into the air, just to scare the intruder and
raise an alarm."

The next day was such a busy one for the Rover boys that they had no
time to do more than look at the biplane and see that it was safe. Abner
Filbury reported that he had slept in a hammock slung beside the machine
and that nothing had happened to arouse him. Nobody but the Rovers knew
that he was on guard. The boys wanted to tell Bob Grimes, but that
individual kept out of the way.

After having settled down in their rooms and to their studies, the three
Rover boys made several flights in the biplane, including one to the
Sanderson farm, where they discovered Songbird calling on Minnie. Both
were seated in a hammock between the house and the barn, and both leaped
up in confusion when the biplane, manipulated by Tom, sailed directly
over their heads. When the Rovers came down in the big field, Minnie ran
to greet them, and, later, she treated them to apple pie and some milk.
Then they set sail once more, leaving their college chum to finish his
interrupted visit.

After this flight the boys ordered a new engine for the _Dartaway_, one
which would make sailing safer, especially in a stiff wind. The makers
said they would send the new engine immediately, and a machinist to
install it, and they agreed to take the old engine back at cost price,
since it was practically new.

It must not be supposed that the Rover boys neglected their studies. As
my old readers know, whatever they tackled they went at with all their
might, and this applied to their work as well as their play.

"Dad sent us here to get an education," said Dick. "And while I am here
I am going to study all I can. There is no telling how long I'll be able
to remain here anyway."

"Thinking of dad's western affairs?" asked Sam.

"Yes; I may have to take hold and help him and Uncle Randolph out. Both
of them are not as young as they used to be, you know."

"That's true, Dick. I noticed dad's hair getting pretty gray, and
uncle's is almost white."

The boys had written home and also to the Stanhopes and the Lanings, and
soon came letters in return. One, from Mr. Anderson Rover, was of
special importance.

     "I have news out of the ordinary," wrote the parent. "That
     man Crabtree and Tad Sobber have come back to the old mill. I
     got the word from Peter Marley. He says they act very
     suspiciously, and that a boy who works for him overheard
     Crabtree and Sobber talking about us. I have sent for a
     detective to come out from the city and watch them for a
     while. If anything new develops I will let you know."

"Now what in the world can old Crabtree and Sobber be up to?" asked Sam,
after all had read the communication.

"Up to some trick, I'll bet a new hat," declared Tom. "I am glad dad
sent for the detective. I hope he catches them red-handed at something,
and locks them up."

"They certainly ought to be locked up," was Dick's comment.

The boys studied hard that evening and by ten o'clock all were tired out
and ready to go to bed. But, just as they were on the point of retiring,
there came a knock on the door of the room occupied by Tom and Sam, and
Stanley appeared.

"You are wanted in Room 14!" said the student, in a loud whisper. "Come
right along."

"What's up?" asked both boys.

"Feast--ice-cream and cake. Max and Spud were down to the town and they
brought the stuff along. Come on, before it's too late and the ice-cream
melts."

"Me for the ice-cream!" cried Tom, and did a handspring over his bed.
"Are the others invited?"

"Sure--a round dozen," answered Stanley.

Room 14 was at the end of the corridor and occupied by two students
named Lane and Parley, whole-souled fellows who were always ready for a
good time. The room was so located that it had much more privacy than
the other apartments.

Soon the boys had gathered,--as jolly a crowd as could be found at
Brill. Max and Spud had spread themselves, it being the German-American
lad's birthday.

"Say, this is certainly fine!" cried Sam, as he surveyed several big
cakes, two hands of bananas, some grapes, and several bricks of
ice-cream of various flavors.

"How are you going to serve the ice-cream?" asked Dick.

"Oh, we're all prepared!" cried Spud, and exhibited a "nest" of paper
saucers and another of paper plates, and then a handful of tin spoons.
"I thought these would answer better than the real thing, for when we
have finished we won't have to wash anything--we can throw the whole
mess away."

"Say, that's Spud," cried the student named Lane. "Once he had to wash
dishes at a picnic we went to and you ought to see the face he cut."

"Come, git busy alretty!" cried Max, as he flourished a knife and
commenced to cut one of the cakes. "Spud, chop the ice-cream up right
avay!"

"All right, me for the chopping!" cried Spud cheerfully, and soon the
cream was being passed around to the assembled students, and the cake
and fruit followed.

"Fine!" cried Tom, as he smacked his lips over the feast. "Max, you have
my full permission to have a birthday once a week."

"Yes, and when you miss a week let Spud take your place," added Sam.

"One thing I can't understand, Spud," said Dick, with great seriousness,
and everybody present stopped eating to hear what the eldest Rover might
have to say.

"What can't you understand?" asked Spud innocently.

"How you could get up a feast like this and forget to supply such an
important thing."

"What important thing?" demanded Spud, and he suddenly looked a trifle
worried.

"Potatoes," returned Dick.

For an instant there was silence, and then, as the other boys remembered
Will's love of potatoes--a love that had given him the nickname of
"Spud," there was a wild burst of laughter.

"Say, Spud, that's one on you!"

"Too bad we didn't bring a few praties along, son!"

"We might have fried a few over the light, eh?"

"Don't you worry, dis feast ain't done yet alretty!" cried Max. "Here is
something more!" And going to his bureau he brought out a square box
wrapped in white paper. "Spud, he gifes me a big cake,--now I gif him
somethings, yes!" And he handed the box over.

"What's this, another joke?" demanded the other student suspiciously.

"Do you think I play a joke?" asked Max, with a hurt look.

"All right then," said Spud, and proceeded to undo the string around the
box. Then he took off the paper and opened the box.

What a shout went up! For the box was filled with potatoes--plain white
and sweet! There were about a quart of them, mixed.

"Oh, what a sell!" murmured Spud. "I knew you'd do something like this!"
he added, grinning sheepishly.

"Better pass 'em around," suggested Tom.

"All right, have one raw!" returned Spud.

"Hi! ton't gif dem avay so kvick!" cried Max, getting excited and
talking more brokenly than usual. "Besser examine dem first."

"Examine 'em?" murmured Spud. "Oh, I see!" he added, and took up one of
the potatoes. "Why, it isn't a potato at all!" he exclaimed as the
article came apart. "It's only a shell, and it's filled with candy!"

"Chocolate drops!" murmured Sam. "Yum! yum!"

"There are salted almonds in this one," went on Spud, opening an
imitation of a sweet potato. "And here are stuffed dates, and this had
raisins in it--and here are soft gum drops! Say, Max, this is certainly
great! How did you happen to think of it?" And Spud looked tremendously
pleased.

"Oh, I know you lof potatoes," answered the German-American youth,
innocently.

The candy was placed on one of the wooden plates, and the almonds and
raisins on another, and then the good things were passed around.

"I'll keep these as souvenirs of the occasion," said Spud, indicating
the imitation potatoes.

"How about it, Songbird, can't you rise to the occasion?" asked Dick,
who had noticed that the student-poet had been unusually quiet while
eating his cake and ice-cream.

"I have--er--just composed a little poem in honor of Max's birthday,"
answered Songbird. "If you'd like me to recite----"

"Sure thing!"

"Turn on the poetry spigot, Songbird, and let her flow!"

"This is not yet finished. But,--but----"

"Give us what you have," said Spud, and clearing his throat several
times, Songbird began.

          "Once more a year has rolled around--
            As years have rolled before--
          Once more we greet our loving friend--
            A true friend to the core!
          We hope that in the future he
            Will win success and fame,
          And go down in our history
            A noble----"

Bang! came the report of a gun, and the shot was so unexpected that
Songbird forgot what he was going to say, and all those at the feast
sprang to their feet. Bang! came a second report.

"What does that mean?" cried Stanley. "Who is firing a gun this time of
night?"

"I think I know what it means!" exclaimed Dick, leaping for the door.
"Come on, if you want to save the _Dartaway_!" he went on, to his
brothers.




CHAPTER XV

A PERILOUS FLIGHT


Without waiting to get a hat or an extra coat, Dick dashed through the
long corridor and down the broad stairs of the dormitory and Tom came at
his heels.

"What's the matter?" cried Spud, grabbing Sam, just as the youngest
Rover boy was about to follow his brothers.

"I'll tell you when we get back," answered Sam. "Don't stop me now,
please, I may be wanted."

"Want any help?" put in Songbird, who for the moment had forgotten what
he was about to recite.

"I don't know--but I guess not."

"We'll go along anyhow," came from Max, and took after Sam, while
several others did the same.

In the meantime Dick and Tom had gained the lower hallway of the
dormitory. The door was fastened, but the key was in the lock and they
soon had the portal open and they leaped outside. Then both started in
the direction of the gymnasium shed.

"See anybody?" cried Tom.

"No, it's too dark," answered Dick. "But that must have been Abner
Filbury's gun."

The two reports from the shotgun had aroused many in various buildings
around the campus, and windows were being raised and heads thrust out.

"What's the trouble?"

"Who fired those shots?"

"Is it a joke?"

"There go two of the Rovers!"

"Are they up to some trick?"

"More than likely. You can't keep Tom Rover quiet."

So the comments ran on, while Dick and Tom sped in the direction of the
shed. As they came closer they received a sudden challenge from the big
doorway.

"Hi! don't you dare to come back here, or I'll shoot you!" The words
were uttered by Abner Filbury, who stood there, shotgun in hand and
lantern by his side.

"Don't shoot!" ordered Dick. "It is I, Dick Rover! What's the trouble?"

"Oh, so it's you, Mr. Rover!" returned the janitor's son, with a sigh
of relief. "I was afraid them pesky rascals was a-coming back."

"What rascals?"

"The fellers as got at the airship while I was asleep. But I guess they
didn't get no chance to hurt anything," went on Abner, hastily.

"Who were they?" asked Tom.

"I don't know. They had rags tied over their faces, so I couldn't see
'em."

"How many of them were there?" questioned Dick.

"Two."

"Are you sure they didn't harm anything?" went on the eldest Rover boy,
as he entered the shed.

"No, I ain't sure, for when I woke up they was in the shed, right under
my hammock. I got scared and I blazed away at the roof, and then they
got scared, I can tell you! They jumped and let out a yell, and ran for
the door, and I got down and went to the door and fired the other barrel
into the air, as a warning. Then they disappeared in the darkness."

"I guess it was----" began Tom, when Dick caught hold of his arm and
silenced him.

"We'll take a look at the machine," said the big brother, and they went
into the shed. Here they were soon joined by Sam and the others; and
soon a close inspection of the biplane was in progress.

"I don't see any damage," said Dick, presently.

"Most likely they didn't have time to do any," replied Tom.

"I'm glad of it," added Sam, with a sigh of relief.

"Who would be so mean?" questioned Stanley.

"I've got my suspicions, but I won't say anything yet," answered Dick.

A proctor and several instructors had come down to the shed, and the
situation had to be explained to them. All thought it mean that anybody
should try to damage the flying machine.

"Perhaps it was merely a boyish trick," said Professor Blackie. "Let us
hope so."

"Maybe," answered Dick. "Just the same, I am glad that I placed Filbury
on guard." And then he told the young man to keep a closer watch than
before, and this Abner promised to do. Then the boys went back to the
dormitory, finished the feast, and went to bed.

A few days later came word that Dora and the Laning girls had arrived at
Hope Seminary, and the Rovers, of course, made immediate preparations to
visit them.

"We'll give 'em a surprise," said Tom, with a grin. "We'll visit 'em in
the _Dartaway_." And this the other brothers readily agreed to do.

A message was sent to the three girls, requesting them to meet the boys
at a certain hour on the campus of the seminary. Then the Rovers got the
_Dartaway_ in readiness for the trip, polishing up the engine and
working parts until they shone like silver.

"If only it doesn't rain, or blow too hard," said Sam, when all was in
readiness.

"Oh, we'll go anyway," cried Tom.

The boys had purchased regular aviation suits, which looked very neat
and professional-like. The new engine was in place, and they had given
it a good try-out and had found that it worked as well as the other and
gave much more power.

"I think we could carry half a dozen folks now," said Sam, after a trial
with some bags of sand. "She takes up the extra weight without an
effort."

"Perhaps, but there is no use of straining the biplane, or the engine
either," returned Dick.

The morning of the all-important day came and the boys found the wind
blowing steadily from the west.

"Rather breezy for a flight," was Dick's comment.

"Do you think it will rain?" queried Sam, anxiously.

"Not with the wind from that quarter, Sam. But we may get more breeze
than we want."

"Oh, we won't mind the wind a bit," declared Tom, who never wanted
anything to interfere with his pleasure.

The boys had their regular classes to attend during the morning, and
also one recitation after lunch. But by half-past two all were free, and
after donning their aviation suits, they hurried to the shed and rolled
out the _Dartaway_.

"Pretty breezy and no mistake," remarked Dick, as he gazed anxiously at
the sky. "I don't know about this."

"Oh, don't say we can't go, Dick!" pleaded Sam.

"Maybe the breeze isn't so strong high up," came from Tom, hopefully.

"It may be stronger, Tom. We don't want to go up and get wrecked."

"Oh, the _Dartaway_ won't get wrecked--not with that powerful engine."

Dick hesitated. He did not like that strong breeze in the least. Yet he
was just as anxious as his brothers to visit the seminary and meet the
girls, and let them see the biplane. And there was something even more
important on his mind.

"Oh, come ahead, and take a chance!" cried Tom. "We'll get through
somehow!"

"Just what I say," declared Sam.

"Who is to run the machine?" asked the big brother.

"I'll run her, if you want me to," answered Tom, promptly.

"Oh, I was only thinking of the honor, Tom. I'm not afraid to try it."

"Oh, you go ahead and do it," put in Sam, who knew that his big
brother's heart was set on showing Dora what he could do with the flying
machine.

"We'll go up and try it," answered Dick, at last. "If she works all
right, I'll head her for the seminary; otherwise I'll bring her down
again;" and so it was arranged.

A number of the students had come out to see the flight and they gave a
cheer as the big biplane rushed over the campus and then arose like a
bird in the air. As the machine went up, Tom looked to one side and saw
Dudd Flockley standing on the campus, in company with a student named
Andy Yates. Both were sneering at the Rovers and their friends.

"The pair that tried to damage the machine," muttered Tom to himself. He
knew that since Larkspur and Koswell had left Brill, Flockley and Yates
had become quite friendly, and he also knew that Yates was a spendthrift
and had a reputation far from good.

Up and up went the biplane, guided by the steady hand and keen eye of
Dick. The wind rushed over the canvas planes and sang merrily through
the wire stays. The engine banged away steadily, and the propellers left
only a blur in the air as they kept whizzing around and around.

"How is it, Dick?" asked Sam, after a full minute had passed, and they
were turning in a big circle.

"Can't tell yet--pretty gusty and full of holes," was the answer, and
Dick gritted his teeth tightly and took a firmer hold of the steering
wheel. Then the _Dartaway_ came around with a rush.

"Wow!" cried Tom, clutching at his seat. "Say, this is some slant!"

"Hold tight!" yelled Dick.

The warning came none too soon, for a gust of wind hit the biplane and
all but made it "turn turtle," as the saying goes. But Dick was on the
watch, and he sent the tips down, and soon the machine righted itself.
Then they rushed away, over the woods beyond the college buildings.

"Going?" queried Sam.

"Are you game?" asked Dick, grimly.

"Sure!"

"What about it, Tom? Don't go if you don't think it is best."

"We'll try it. Dick. But if you spill us out--well, please choose a soft
spot, that's all!" went on Tom, who had to have his joke, even in such a
time of peril.

To take that trip, with such a wind blowing, was not a wise move, and
all three of the Rovers knew it. But they wanted so much to see the
girls, and show them the biplane, that they were willing to take the
risk.

On and on sailed the _Dartaway_, now in the teeth of the breeze and then
with the wind on the quarter. All of the youths clung fast constantly,
for their was great danger of being pitched into space. They had straps
for fastening themselves, but hated to use these, fearing that they
might get in some position where a quick jump might mean safety. If they
were strapped in, and the biplane fell, they might be crushed to death
under the heavy engine.

Most of the trip was made in the face of the wind, which, every instant,
seemed to grow stronger. The _Dartaway_ acted like a thing of life,
swooping and careening from one side to the other. Dick had to
manipulate the wheel and the levers constantly, to keep anything like
an even "keel."

"Can you keep to the course?" questioned Tom, after about half the
distance to the seminary had been covered.

"I don't know--it depends on the wind," Dick replied. "I may go around
to the westward--it seems to be better sailing that way."

In the end they had to make a wide detour, and Dick was wondering how he
was going to turn in the direction of Hope Seminary, when the wind
suddenly died down. This was his chance, and on the instant he headed
directly for the seminary.

"There it is!" cried Sam, presently. "I see the buildings!"

"There is the campus!" added Tom, a minute later. "And there are the
girls, waving banners at us!"

"I see them!" answered Dick, and then he shut off the engine, and
silently and with the grace of a big, white swan, the _Dartaway_
volplaned to the earth.




CHAPTER XVI

DICK AND DORA


"Oh, Dick, how lovely!"

"Weren't you afraid, Sam?"

"What a big flying machine, Tom!"

Such were the exclamations from Dora, Grace and Nellie, as all rushed
forward to where the boys were alighting from the _Dartaway_. Soon they
were shaking hands all around, and soon other girl students were coming
up, to learn what the arrival of the flying machine meant.

"Well, we certainly had a great trip," said Dick.

"The wind was pretty strong," put in Sam.

"Strongest wind you ever saw!" declared Tom, stoutly. "Turned us over
about 'steen times and rolled us into a regular ball."

"Oh, Tom, what an idea!" exclaimed Nellie, and began to laugh. "But
weren't you afraid?" she went on anxiously.

"What, me? Never! But Sam was so afraid he shook off his shoes, and one
of 'em dropped right on a cow, and----"

"Tom Rover!" burst out Grace. "What a story-teller you are!"

"Well, Grace, if you don't believe it, go and ask that cow," went on the
fun-loving Rover, soberly. "It's lucky Sam has elastics on the shoes--to
pull 'em back by. If he hadn't had----" Tom did not finish but shook his
head mournfully.

"I am so glad you got here safely, Dick," said Dora, in a low voice.
"But oh, do you think it is quite safe?" she went on, anxiously. "I--I
don't want you to get hurt!"

"I guess it is safe enough, Dora," he replied, not wishing to alarm her.
"It's like an auto--you've got to get used to it."

"I don't think I'd ever get used to a flying machine."

"Maybe you would. Some day I'll take you up and you can see how you like
it." But Dora shook her head at this.

The boys had hoped to have a quiet time with the three girls, but this
was not to be just then. The students of the seminary gathered around,
and the lads were kept busy explaining about the biplane, and how the
engine and the steering gear worked. Then, to show that they could run
the _Dartaway_ as well as Dick, Tom took the machine up and Sam
followed him, each making several circles around the campus.

"Any girls want to go up?" questioned Tom. "Now don't please all speak
at once." There was a general giggle, but nobody accepted the
invitation. Then the Rovers turned to those they had come to visit, and,
taking the hint, the other girl students sauntered away.

"Wouldn't you like some refreshments?" asked Dora. "We might get some
hot coffee and some cake."

"No, we'll have to get back before dark," answered Dick. "So we'll just
stay and talk awhile. Any special news from home?"

"No. Mamma is going away for her health, and Mrs. Laning is going with
her."

"I hope they go where old Crabtree and Sobber can't find them."

"That is what they are going to try to do, Dick. Oh, dear, I wish those
people would never come near us again!"

"They are up near our home now," answered the eldest Rover boy, and told
about the old mill.

"Whatever are they up to now, do you think, Dick?"

"I can't imagine. We are all awaiting developments."

"Your folks ought to be on guard."

"They are on guard--and dad has hired a detective to keep his eye on
Crabtree and Sobber."

"What about your father, Dick? You wrote that he was worried over some
business matter."

"He is, and Uncle Randolph is worried, too, Dora. It's some business you
wouldn't understand--something about some western investment. You see
dad and uncle are getting old and they can't watch things as they used
to--and Uncle Randolph is all wrapped up in scientific farming, just as
he always was. I sometimes think it's time I took hold of business
matters and helped them."

"Then you'd have to leave Brill, wouldn't you?"

"Yes; but I'd not mind that--I have a pretty good education even now,
and I could study in my spare moments. I could take a short course,
instead of one of the long ones. And then, Dora, that would help out
another way," went on Dick in a lower voice, and looking over his
shoulder to make sure that the others were not listening. But the others
had walked off to the rear of the big biplane.

"Another way? How?" And Dora looked at him wonderingly.

"Oh, you know well enough."

"No, I don't," she replied; but two bright spots began to show in her
pretty cheeks, making her prettier than ever.

"Well, I made up my mind that as soon as I left college I was going to
get married," Dick went on, looking her full in the eyes.

"Oh, Dick!" And now she cast her eyes on the ground.

"Sure. Don't you think it's a good idea?" he went on, and he caught her
hand and held it.

"Oh, I--I----" She blushed more than ever and could not go on.

"I know we are not so very old, Dora, but, on the other hand, we are not
so very young either, and I think your mother would approve, and I am
sure my father wouldn't object. I know he thinks you are just the finest
girl in the whole world,--he said so."

"Well, mamma likes you, too, Dick,--she's told me that many times."

"Then I'm sure she won't object. And, besides, when I'm her son-in-law
I'll be able to do a good deal more than I can now--about helping her
with her financial affairs, and all that, you know."

"Yes, I know that, too."

"And so I think we ought to get married. But, of course, if you object,
Dora----"

"Did I object?" And she smiled just a little--a smile that set his heart
bounding.

"Then you'll consent?" he asked eagerly. "Will you? Say yes, won't you?"
And now he had hold of both of her hands and was looking her full in the
eyes. "I want you so much, Dora,--I've wanted you ever since I first met
you--on that little steamboat, on the way to Putnam Hall."

"Oh, Dick, what an idea! Why, you hardly knew me then!"

"Never mind, I knew you well enough."

"What a long time ago that was," murmured the girl. She was still gazing
fully into his eyes.

"Yes, it was a long time ago, and yet, somehow, it seems an awfully
short time, too. But, Dora, you haven't said yes yet. Won't you please
say yes?" he pleaded, in a lower voice, as Tom and the others started to
rejoin them.

"Yes," she murmured, her face becoming a rosy red. "Yes. Any time you
say, Dick, if mamma is willing."

"You dear, dear girl!" he cried softly. "Oh, I just wish I had you all
to myself for a moment!" And he gave her a look that spoke volumes.

"Well, we've got to get back, that is all there is to it," came from Sam
loudly. He could not help but notice how confidential Dick and Dora were
becoming.

"I'd like to stay, but we've got to make the trip before it gets too
dark," added Tom.

"Just as you say," answered Dick, although he did not, just then, see
how he was going to tear himself away.

But the boys did not leave for a good quarter of an hour, and during
that time, Dick and Dora somehow managed to walk to the end of the
campus, where there were big clumps of rose bushes and lilac shrubbery.
Once in the shadow of these Dick pulled something from a pocket and held
it out to Dora.

"If we are going to be regularly engaged, you must have this," he said.

"Oh, Dick, a diamond ring!" she cried, as the glint of the jewel caught
her eyes.

"Hold out your hand, dear," he said, and when she held it out he placed
the ring on her finger. Then he took her in his arms.

"Mine, Dora, mine, always and forever mine!"

"Always, and forever, Dick!" she answered. And then they kissed each
other.

When they rejoined the others each felt as if walking on air.

"But the ring--they'll be sure to see it, Dick!" whispered Dora.

"If they don't I shall be disappointed," he answered.

It was Grace who espied the glittering circlet first and she uttered a
slight shriek. Then she pointed it out to her sister.

"A diamond ring--an engagement ring!" she cried.

"Oh, how lovely!" exclaimed Nellie.

"Ladies and gentlemen, the future Mrs. Dick Rover!" said Dick, just a
bit awkwardly, while Dora blushed the color of a peony.

"Oh, Dora!" cried Grace and Nellie, in chorus, and then each kissed her.

"I thought I smelt a mouse," murmured Sam.

"Hail to the bride!" cried Tom. "Say, Dick, isn't it proper to salute
your future sister-in-law?" he went on, with a broad grin.

"I don't know--better ask her," replied Dick, good-naturedly, and then
Tom kissed Dora, and Sam did the same thing. After that Tom declared he
ought to kiss the "bride-to-be's cousins," and started in, and Sam
followed.

"Here, you kids break away!" cried Dick finally. "I thought you said we
had to get back before dark."

"'Kids' indeed!" snorted Tom. "My, how old we've gotten since we're
engaged!" And then he grinned more than ever. "But never mind," he went
on to Nellie, in a whisper. "Just you wait and see the diamond ring I
get you one of these days." And this remark made Nellie blush as
deeply as had Dora. Sam said something, too, to Grace about a ring, at
which she laughed merrily and slapped his face. But when the boys were
in the biplane and ready to sail away, and he held up a finger with a
ring on it and looked at her questioningly--and longingly--she gave a
quick little nod of her curly head.

[Illustration: "OH, DICK, A DIAMOND RING!" SHE CRIED.--_Page_ 161.]

"All ready?" asked Dick, at last.

"All ready!" replied his brothers.

"Then start her up!" cried the oldest Rover boy, and the others gave a
turn to the propellers. Bang! bang! bang! went the engine, and Sam and
Tom rushed to their seats.

"Come again soon!" cried the girls.

"Just as soon as we can!" was the answer.

"Be careful!" pleaded Dora. "Please, please be careful!"

"We'll look out--don't worry," answered Dick. He had to shout, to make
himself heard above the noise of the motor. Then came the usual whizz
and rush, and a few seconds later the Rover boys were once more in the
air and bound for Brill.

Dick would have been pleased could he have allowed his mind to linger on
the conversation he had had with Dora, but he soon found this out of the
question. The wind had come up again, and was now blowing as strongly as
ever, and he had all he could do to manage the _Dartaway_. Soon the big
biplane commenced to pitch and toss like a small boat on the bosom of an
angry ocean.

"Say, this is getting something fierce!" was Sam's comment, after a
particularly thrilling dip. "I thought we were going right down that
time."

"You hold tight!" yelled Dick. "Don't let go for an instant."

"I'm as tight as glue," was the reply.

"Hadn't you better go up a bit, Dick?" came from Tom.

"Just what I thought of doing," was the answer.

The rudders were shifted, and swiftly the biplane mounted through space.
It was now growing dark, and presently the panorama that had been below
them, vanished from view.

"Huh! This won't do!" cried Dick. "I can't see how to steer."

"Steer by the wind for awhile," suggested Sam.

A minute later came a fierce gust of wind, followed by a second and then
a third. Around spun the biplane and then tilted up as if about to go
over. Then came an unexpected ripping and tearing sound.

"It's the left plane--it's torn loose!" yelled Sam. "Let her down, Dick,
before it is too late! If you don't, we'll drop to our death!"




CHAPTER XVII

CAUGHT IN A HAILSTORM


All of the Rover boys realized their extreme peril, yet for the moment
they were powerless to do anything to help themselves. Dick put out his
hand to stop the engine of the biplane, then concluded that it might be
more advantageous to keep the propellers moving.

Around and around spun the flying machine, tossed like a chip on an
angry ocean. All grew dark about the three boys and each gave himself up
for lost. It was useless to attempt to steer, so Dick held the craft as
she was, so far as the wheel was concerned.

Then came a sudden, sickening drop and a tilting to one side. Sam let
out a wild yell, but what he said was drowned out in the roaring of the
wind and the noise of the engine. Then, of a sudden, the _Dartaway_ dove
forward and the gust of air was left behind. They came into a "hole," as
it is termed by aviators, and again they sank. But now Dick was gaining
control once more and he tilted the front rudder and up they went for a
hundred feet, but in something of a circle, because of the broken plane.

"Can't you land?" gasped Tom. "We can't--can't--stand--this!"

"I'll do what I can," replied Dick, between his set teeth. He knew that
their very lives depended on how he handled the biplane.

Slowly and with great caution Dick allowed the _Dartaway_ to get closer
to the earth. Each of the boys strained his eyes, to catch sight of what
might be below. Then came another gust, and this was followed by a
strange rattling on the biplane. Small, white objects were bouncing in
all directions.

"It's hail!" cried Sam. "We've struck a hail squall!"

He was right, and the hail continued to come down all around them,
driven by a sweeping wind that carried the _Dartaway_ hither and
thither. But it was one of those sudden squalls that do not last long,
and soon they were sailing in the clear air again, and now within view
of the ground below.

"There is a fine field--to the right," cried Tom.

Dick nodded and, not without an effort, brought the biplane around. Then
he shut off the motor, and they slid to earth quicker than they had
anticipated. The _Dartaway_ struck the ground and bounced up and down
several times on its rubber-tired wheels and then came to a standstill
in the midst of some brushwood. Poor Sam was thrown out heels over head
into the bushes.

"Are you hurt?" sang out Dick, anxiously. It was so dark he could not
see what had become of his youngest brother.

"I--I guess not!" came back from Sam, and he started to scramble out of
the bushes. "Say, that was some sail, wasn't it?" he continued.

"No more like that for me!" returned Tom, panting like a race horse.
"Are you O. K., Dick?"

"Yes, although that bumping shook me up. But come, fasten the _Dartaway_
down before the wind comes up again and blows it to kingdom come!"

This warning was necessary for the wind was still fitful and there was
no telling how strong it might become. All sprang forward to do what
they could to save the biplane from destruction.

"If there was a barn handy we might use that," said Sam.

They looked around, but the only building nearby was a small cottage,
evidently one used by a farmer's hired hands.

"Run her around between the bushes," directed Dick. "They will protect
her a little, for the bushes are quite high."

They found a spot between the undergrowth and into it forced the
biplane, until the air craft was completely surrounded. The bushes broke
the force of the wind and the lads had little difficulty in tying the
machine fast with the ropes they always carried. It was hailing again,
although not so heavily as before. The wind was gradually going down,
but the sky was as dark and threatening as ever.

"I think it will turn into rain before very long," said Dick, after a
look around. "Too bad it couldn't have held off half an hour longer.
Then we'd have been safe at Brill."

"I'm thankful we got down safely, Dick," said Sam.

"Oh, so am I!"

"It was a narrow escape," was Tom's comment. "Great hambones! Who would
have thought we'd run into such weather as this!"

"Oh, hailstorms like this are not uncommon, even in midsummer," answered
Dick. "Don't you remember the one that came and cut down our corn some
years ago?"

"Yes, and broke all the glass in the hothouse," added Sam. "Say, is the
machine hurt much?" he went on.

"We'll have to make an examination."

They looked the biplane over as best they could in the semi-darkness.
One of the bamboo poles had been split and two of the canvas stretches
were slit from end to end.

"Not as bad as it might be," said Dick. "We can easily mend the canvas.
But I guess we had better get a new pole in place of that one. I'd not
care to trust it, even if it were wired."

"Perhaps we can wire it good enough to get back to Brill with," returned
Tom. "We can't stay here."

"I've had enough sailing for to-day!" cried Sam. "Let us walk back, or
get a carriage, and leave the biplane here until some fine day when
there is no wind."

"Yes, we can't use her any more to-day," said Dick. "Let us cover the
engine and walk to that cottage and find out just where we are, and how
we can get to Brill."

Having arranged everything as well as the means at hand permitted, the
three Rover boys left the vicinity of the brushwood and walked over to
where the small cottage was located. The ground was covered with
hailstones and Tom could not resist the temptation to gather up a
handful and pelt his brothers.

"Stop it!" cried Sam, and then, as Tom would not stop, he rushed in with
some of the hailstones in his hand and allowed them to slide down inside
of Tom's collar.

"Wow!" roared the fun-loving Rover. "Let up, Sam! That feels as if I'd
hit the North Pole!"

"Then you let up," answered Sam, firmly; and after that Tom let the
hailstones alone.

As they neared the cottage they saw that a lantern was lit and set on a
table in the centre of the living room. Around the table sat three
persons, two young fellows and an older man, evidently a farmer. The
three were smoking and playing cards, and on the table lay some
bank-bills.

"Why, look at this!" cried Dick, in astonishment. Then he added quickly:
"Get out of sight, don't show yourselves!" And he caught each of his
brothers by the arm and led the pair to the rear of the building.

"What's up, Dick?" asked Sam. "Who were they?"

"Didn't you recognize those young fellows?"

"I did!" cried Tom, in a low voice. "They were Jerry Koswell and Bart
Larkspur!"

"Koswell and Larkspur!" exclaimed Sam. "Are you sure?"

"Tom is right," replied Dick.

"Who was the third fellow?"

"I don't know. He looked like a farmer to me."

"Did you see the money on the table?" broke out Tom. "They must have
been gambling!"

"It looked that way to me, Tom."

"If they were, all I've got to say, that third fellow better look out
for Koswell and Larkspur," continued Tom. "They are sharpers at cards,
so Dudd Flockley once told me. He said they got him to put up his money
a number of times and each time they won. He was inclined to think they
didn't play fairly."

"Well, knowing them as we do, I'd say they wouldn't be above cheating,"
said Sam. "But what in the world can they be doing in this
out-of-the-way place?"

"That remains to be found out," replied his big brother. "Maybe they
were on the road and ran here for shelter from the hailstorm."

"I'm not afraid of them, Dick," said Tom.

"Neither am I, Tom, you know that."

"Then what's the use of keeping out of sight? I'd rather go in there and
give them a thrashing, like the one we gave them on that island."

"Don't forget we have the _Dartaway_ here and they might take pleasure
in ruining the craft or running off with her. Besides, I'd like to watch
them a bit and find out a little about their plans. Remember, they want
to play us some dirty trick."

"There they go!" burst out Sam, at that instant, and motioned to the
front of the cottage. All looked in the direction he pointed out, to see
Koswell and Larkspur hurrying down a lane that led to a road running
between the trees.

"You come back here! That wasn't fair!" shouted the farm hand who had
been playing cards with them. "Come back!" And he rushed to the front
door of the cottage and waved his arm wildly.

"It was fair!" shouted back Jerry Koswell.

"Sure it was fair!" added Bart Larkspur. "We'd come back, only we are in
a hurry."

"You cheated me!" stormed the farm hand and shook his fist at the pair.
But they paid no further attention, and soon the darkness and a bend of
the road hid them from view.

The Rover boys waited a few seconds and then knocked on the back door of
the cottage. The farm hand, a fellow named Dan Murdock, stamped over to
the door and threw it open.

"What do you want?" he asked surlily. The loss of his money had made him
ill-tempered.

"Why, hello, Murdock!" cried Sam. "I didn't know you lived here."

"Oh, so it's you, Rover," answered the farm hand. He remembered that he
had once given Sam a ride and had been well paid for it. "Caught in the
hailstorm?" he went on, a bit more pleasantly.

"Yes. These are my brothers," added Sam. "We were out and we got lost.
Can you tell us the best road to the college?"

"Of course. Walk through the woods back there. Then take the road to the
left and at the cross roads turn to the right. You'll see the signs, so
you can't go wrong."

"And how far is it?"

"About two miles. You can take the road yonder, too, but that's about a
mile longer."

"Do you live here?" asked Dick, curiously.

"I sleep here--me and two other hands. We get our meals up to Mr.
Dawson's house--the man we work for."

"Oh, then this is the Dawson farm?" Dick remembered that Mr. Dawson
supplied butter and eggs to the college.

"Yes, sir."

"I'm glad to know that, for we need some help. We were out in our
flying machine and had to come down over there. We'll want somebody to
look after the machine until we can fix it up and take it away. Of
course we'll pay for what's done," he added.

"Oh, I heard tell of that flying machine!" exclaimed the farm hand. "You
sailed over this farm a couple of hours ago."

He was much interested and wanted to know all about the trip, and about
the machine. He said Mr. Dawson was away, but that the _Dartaway_ could
be wheeled up into one of the big barns and left there until repaired.
Then he agreed to get out a two-seated carriage and drive the boys over
to Brill. Inside of half an hour the biplane was safely housed, and the
whole party was on the way to the college.

Dick had warned Sam and Tom to remain silent concerning Koswell and
Larkspur, and it was not until they were almost to Brill that he
mentioned the fact that they had seen the pair running away from the
cottage.

"Seen 'em, did you?" cried Dan Murdock. "Say, them fellers are
swindlers, they are! They came in to git out of the hail and then they
started to play cards, just to while away the time, so they said. They
asked me to play, and as I couldn't work just then, I consented, and
then they got me to put up some money,--just to make it interestin',
they said. They let me win a little at first, and then they got me to
put up more and more, and then they cheated me and wiped me out!"

"And how much did they get from you?" asked Dick.

"They got nearly all my savings--eighty dollars!" answered Dan Murdock,
grimly.




CHAPTER XVIII

TOM AND HIS FUN


"Got eighty dollars from you!" murmured Dick. "That's too bad!"

"It would be bad enough if I lost it fairly," answered the farm hand.
"But I am sure they swindled me."

"Well, you ought not to gamble," put in Sam, who had listened to the
talk with interest.

"I suppose that's true," mumbled Dan Murdock. "But they said I might win
a pile. Oh, I was a big fool--I know it now, even if I didn't know it
then. I wish I had stopped 'em from leaving."

"Why didn't you?"

"They went so sudden like--after they had my money. One of 'em took out
his watch and said they'd miss the train, and away they started before
you could say Jack Robinson! But there ain't no train this time o' day."

"It was a trick to get away," said Tom.

"Sure--I know that, now! Oh, if only I had my hands on 'em. Say, they
don't belong at Brill, do they?" went on the farm hand eagerly.

"No, although they used to go there," answered Dick.

"Then you saw 'em?"

"Yes, we saw them running away."

"What are their names?" and when Dick had mentioned them Dan Murdock
shook his head slowly.

"I've heard of 'em before," he said. "They used to hang around at the
tavern. I was a big fool, no two ways about it! I guess they'll keep out
of my sight after this."

"More than likely," answered Dick.

When the boys arrived at the college they found an anxious crowd looking
for them and the biplane. Songbird and Stanley and several others rushed
to the carriage to greet them.

"Were you wrecked?"

"Did you get a bad tumble?"

"Where did you come down?"

So the questions ran on and the boys had to answer as best they could.
Everybody seemed to be glad to learn that they had escaped from the fury
of the sudden hailstorm--that is, everybody but Dudd Flockley and his
new crony, Andy Yates.

"Just like the Rovers' luck," muttered Flockley, sourly. "They'd escape
where everybody else would be smashed up."

"Oh, they'll get a smash, if you give 'em time enough," answered Andy
Yates, heartlessly. He was a student who courted attention and it galled
him to see the Rovers the center of attraction.

As soon as Dick, Tom and Sam could get time to do so, they sent a
message to Hope Seminary, informing the girls that they had gotten back
to Brill in safety. This relieved much anxiety, for with the sudden
coming of the wind and hail the girls had feared that the youths might
be killed.

After such a strenuous adventure, the Rover boys were content to take it
easy for some time. They sent to the city for a man to come and repair
the _Dartaway_ and then settled down to their studies. Then, after the
biplane had been repaired, they went after the machine and brought it
back to Brill, and it was placed in the gymnasium shed, with Abner
Filbury to guard it, as before.

"Don't you want to go up, Songbird?" asked Tom, one afternoon, after
college hours.

"I--er--I don't think so," answered the student-poet, gravely.

"Rather make up verses about flying than fly, eh?"

"I--er--I think so, Tom."

"What have you made up about airships, anything really fine, Songbird?"

"Well, I've written a few little verses, Tom. Would you like to hear
them?"

"Sure!" cried the fun-loving Rover, and then Songbird commenced to
recite:

          "I spread my wings on the balmy air,
          And float and float I know not where.
          I rise, I fall, I fall, I rise,
          For I am monarch of the skies!"

"Bang up, Songbird! Couldn't be better!" cried Tom. "Give us another
dip, like the small boy said of the ice-cream." And the would-be poet
continued:

          "I rush along when skies are blue,
          And when it hails I sail right through!
          I feel----"

"Hold on, Songbird! You've got to change that line. We didn't sail right
through when it hailed--we came down just as quickly as we could."

"Oh, that's only a figure of speech," answered the would-be poet
loftily, and then he continued:

          "I feel I can sail anywhere,
          For I am monarch of the air!"

"Good for you!" put in Sam, who was present. "For A, No. 1, first-grade
poetry apply to Songbird every time."

"There are sixteen verses in all," went on the poet, eagerly. "The next
one begins----"

"Sorry, there goes the supper bell!" interrupted Tom. "Come on, we've
got to eat, even if we miss the finest poem in the universe."

"I--er--I didn't hear any bell," answered Songbird.

"You didn't?" cried Tom, innocently. "Well! well! Come on in and see
anyway!" And he dragged the would-be poet along and forced him into a
crowd of students. "Guess I was mistaken," he said soberly. "Too bad!"
And off he, ran, and Sam ran after him.

"Well, it wasn't half bad," said the youngest Rover.

"That's true, Sam," returned Tom, and then he added with a sudden broad
grin: "But how about an egg that was only half bad--would you want to
eat it? Some day Songbird may write real poetry--but not yet."

It was now ideal football weather and the football elevens, the regular
and the scrub, were out daily for practice. Dick and Tom had been asked
to play but both had declined, for they wished to pay attention to their
studies, and the biplane took up all their spare time. Sam played a
little on the scrub, but soon gave it up.

During those days Dick was more serious than usual, and neither Tom nor
Sam bothered their elder brother. They knew he was thinking of his
engagement to Dora, and also worrying over the business affairs of their
father and their Uncle Randolph.

One day Tom and Sam took a short trip in the biplane and persuaded
Stanley to go with them, and the next day they took out Spud. But nobody
else of their chums cared to go.

"A new arrival to-morrow!" cried Sam, one evening. "Just from a trip to
Paris, too."

"Is it William Philander Tubbs?" queried Tom, looking up from the theme
he was writing.

"You've struck it, Tom. Since you wrote to him about the socks he has
been over to Paris. But he gets back to the grind to-morrow--comes in on
the four-thirty train."

"Say, let us get up a reception in William's honor!" cried the
fun-loving Rover; and as soon as the theme was finished he began to
arrange his plans.

The next afternoon the Rovers and a crowd of their chums took one of the
college carryalls and drove over to Ashton station to witness the sport.
Tom had been to town early in the morning and had arranged matters with
eight colored waiters from the hotel, and also with a local liveryman.

As the train came in the boys and a number of others were on the watch
for Tubbs. As soon as they saw the dudish student alight, dress-suit
case in hand, the Rovers rushed up to him.

"How are you, Sir William!" cried Dick, taking the dude's hand gravely.

"Let me congratulate you, Lord Tubbs!" cried Sam, bowing low.

"Your Highness will find his carriage this way," put in Tom, taking the
dress-suit case and flinging it to one of the colored men.

"Why--er--weally, don't you know, what does--er--this mean?" stammered
poor William Philander, gazing around in astonishment.

And well might he be astonished, for there, before him, in a wide-open
double row, stood the eight colored men, all dressed in black, with
broad red sashes over their breasts and cockades of red paper in their
hats. On the platform between the colored men was a bright red stair
carpet, and this carpet led directly to where a carriage was in waiting.
The carriage had four white horses, all decorated in red ribbons, and on
the seat sat a driver, also decorated in red.

"Such an honor to have your Lordship condescend to come to Brill," went
on Tom, with a low bow.

"What did the Queen say when she decorated you?" asked Dick.

"It was a grand thing for the King to honor you so highly," put in Sam.

"I certainly envy you," came from Songbird, who was in the secret.

"Hope there is a good salary attached to the office," was Stanley's
comment.

"I've heard it vas fife thousand pounds by the year!" vouchsafed Max.

"How the girls will fall in love with you when they hear of this,"
sighed Spud.

"This way, your Excellency!" cried Tom, and led poor, bewildered Tubbs
to the carriage.

"Thomas, my dear fellow, what--er--what does it mean?" gasped the dudish
student, his eyes opening wider and wider.

"Oh, you can't fool us, Tubblets," whispered the fun-loving Rover. "You
were going to keep it a secret, but we read all about it in the London
paper one of the fellows sent over."

"Read about--ah--what, please?"

"Why, how the king and queen knighted you, and all that, Philliam
Whilander."

"William Philander, please, Thomas. But--er--this is a mistake----"

"No, no, Tubby, my boy, no mistake at all, I assure you. This is in your
honor solely. The college faculty did it--they couldn't do less, to one
so decorated, or knighted,--which is it, please? It's the grandest thing
that ever happened to Brill."

"But don't you know, I--er--I haven't been--er--knighted, or anything
else. I wasn't in England, I went to Paris, and----"

"Now, now, my dear boy, don't try that game," said Tom, reproachfully.
"We all know perfectly well that you were knighted and that you are now
Sir Tubbs, P. X. C., and all that. We salute you!" And then Tom took off
his hat. "Three cheers for Sir Tubbs!" he called loudly.

The cheers were given with a will, and a tiger added. Poor Tubbs was
almost stricken dumb, and commenced to mop the perspiration from his
forehead.

"Don't crowd so close!" cried Tom, warningly. "His Lordship must have
air! He isn't used to so much excitement! Stand back! Now then, into the
carriage, if you please!" And into the turnout went poor Tubbs, and the
next instant his hat was snatched from his head and a tall, white beaver
was placed in its stead. Then several medals of tin and brass were
pinned to his coat, and the crowd set up a riotous cheering.

"Hurrah for Sir Tubbs!"

"My, what an honor for Brill!"

"Nothing like having a real nobleman for a student!"

"Away we go! Pile in, boys!" cried Tom, and then there was a crack of a
whip, and off the strange turnout started, with poor Tubbs on the seat
looking more bewildered than ever, and followed by the great carryall
with the yelling and singing students who had come to greet him.




CHAPTER XIX

STARTLING NEWS FROM HOME


"Here the conquering hero comes!"

"Say, but he looks like a real Lord, doesn't he?"

"Don't forget to bow to all the people you pass, Sir Tubbs!"

So the cries rang on, as the carriage and the carryall rolled away from
the Ashton depot.

"Say, look here, what does this mean?" stammered the dudish student. "I
tell you I'm no lord, or knight, or anything like that! I was over to
Paris, not London, don't you know. Weally, this is--er--very
embarrassing!" he pleaded, wildly.

"Stand up and make a speech, when you get to the campus, Willie boy!"
sang out Tom. "Give 'em something grand on high finance, or railroad
building, or cooking beans, or something like that."

"Why, Tom, weally, don't you know, I know nothing of--er--railroads,
or--er--beans. Please stop the carriage, I wish to get out. This
is--er--awful, don't you know!" fairly panted the dude. He had stood up,
but now the carriage gave a jolt and down he sat very suddenly.

On through the town and straight for the college drove the two turnouts,
the students yelling themselves hoarse. Many at Brill had been let into
the secret, and when the grounds were reached a big crowd was
congregated, to take part in the sport.

"Here they are!"

"Hurrah for Lord Tubbs!"

"How are you, Duke William Philander!"

"Do you wear the order of the Red Garter?"

"No, it's the Blue Suspender he was decorated with."

"Speech! speech!" came the cry from every side.

Then the carriage came to a halt and was immediately surrounded by a
howling mob. A few had flowers that they threw at William Philander,
while others had supplied themselves with stalks of celery, carrot and
beet tops, and similar things, which they sent forward with force and
directness.

"Here's a bouquet for you!"

"My kindest regards, Tubbs!"

"Oh, isn't it grand to be a real, live Emperor!"

"Hi, let up, will you!" fairly shrieked poor Tubbs, as the things hit
him in the head and shoulders, "Let up, I tell you! Oh, what a joke! Let
me get out of the carriage! I can't make a speech! Stop throwing at me!
Oh, my eye!" he added, as a beet top caught him in the left optic. Then,
watching his chance, he leaped from the carriage, dove like a madman
through the crowd, and rushed for one of the dormitories, quickly
disappearing from view.

"Good bye, my boy, good bye!" sang out several. And then Tom sent the
dress-suit case after him; and the fun came to an end.

"Poor William Philander, he won't forget that in a hurry!" was Dick's
comment. "Just the same, I am afraid the sport got a little too rough at
the end."

"Maybe it did," answered Tom. "If you want it, I'll speak to Tubbs and
apologize."

"I see that apology in a gold frame right now!" declared Sam, with a
laugh. "Tom, let him alone and he'll be all right."

All of the boys wondered how Tubbs would act when he showed himself.
Much to their amazement he called Tom to one side that evening and shook
hands cordially.

"It was all a mistake--this report that I had--er--been knighted, don't
you know," he lisped. "But it was very nice to get up such a reception
in my honor, Thomas, really it was--although it got a bit rough towards
the end. But I know it was meant well, and I thank you, honestly I do."
And the dudish student shook Tom's hand again.

And then, for once in his life, Tom Rover didn't know what to say. As he
afterwards admitted, he was completely "stumped." Poor, innocent Tubbs
had really thought it an honor! To Tom that was "the limit."

"I'll never really know that chap," he said to his brothers. "His head
must be filled with sawdust and punk."

"Well, let him drop now," advised Dick. "Quit your fooling, Tom, and get
at your studies. You know what I told you. We may have to leave Brill
before we anticipated. And we want to get all the learning we can."

"Have you heard anything more from dad?" demanded the fun-loving Rover
quickly.

"Yes, a letter came this evening. That business affair is in a worse
twist than ever. But dad hopes he can straighten it out. But he writes
that he isn't feeling as well as he was. If he gets sick, we'll have to
jump in--or at least I will--and take his place."

"We'll all jump in," was Sam's comment. "I'd like to do something in a
business way."

"Did dad give any particulars?" asked Tom.

"None but what we already know. He felt too ill to write much."

"Has he heard anything more of Crabtree or Sobber?"

"Nothing."

During the following week there was some excitement at Brill because of
a football game between that college and another institution of
learning. It was a gala occasion, and the Rover boys hired a
three-seated carriage and brought Dora, Nellie and Grace to the game.
Brill won the contest, and a great jubilee lasting far into the night
followed. The Rovers and the three girls had a little feast of their own
at the Ashton hotel, and on the way back to Hope the young people sang
songs, and had a good time generally. Perhaps some very sentimental
things were said--especially between Dick and Dora--but if so, who can
blame them? The placing of that engagement ring on Dora's finger by Dick
had made them both exceedingly happy.

During those days the boys took several short trips in the _Dartaway_,
once landing in the field on the Dawson farm. They sought out Dan
Murdock and asked him if he had seen anything more of Koswell and
Larkspur.

"Yes, I see 'em last week, but they got out of sight in the woods, and
I couldn't find 'em," answered the farm hand.

"Around here?" asked Dick.

"No, that was on the edge of the big woods back of Hope Seminary. I was
driving along, with some crates of eggs for the girls' college, when I
see 'em, sitting on a fallen tree, smoking cigarettes. I stopped my
hosses and spoke to 'em, and then they up and run into the woods as fast
as they could go! I looked for 'em, but I couldn't git on their track
nohow."

"What can they be doing up around Hope?" murmured Sam.

"Maybe they are sweet on some of the girls," returned Tom. "I know they
used to go up there, when they attended Brill."

"I hope, if they visit Hope, they don't speak to Dora and the others,"
said Dick, as his face clouded.

"Maybe we better warn the girls," said Sam.

"No, don't do that," said Tom. "You'd only scare them. They know Koswell
and Larkspur well enough. Don't say anything." And so the matter was
dropped.

Two days later came a special delivery letter from home that filled the
three boys with intense interest.

     "Josiah Crabtree and Tad Sobber have at last shown their
     hand," wrote Mr. Anderson Rover. "They have sent an unsigned
     communication to me demanding fifty thousand dollars. They
     give me just two weeks in which to get the money together in
     cash and place it at a certain spot along the road between
     our home and Oak Run. If the money is not forthcoming they
     promise to blow up every building on the farm. The
     communication says, 'You can pay half of this and get the
     other half from your lady friends.' Which means, of course,
     the Stanhopes and Lanings."

"Of all the cowardly things!" cried Tom, after listening to the above.
"Why, it's a regular sort of Black Hand communication!"

"So it is," added Sam. "What else does dad say," he went on, and Dick
continued the reading of the letter:

     "At first I was inclined to treat the communication lightly
     and laugh at it, but then came another letter--a mere scrawl,
     stating they would give me a taste of what to expect that
     night. I told the detective of this and he came to the house
     and remained all night with us. About three o'clock in the
     morning there was an explosion outside, and when we dressed
     and ran out we found one of the chicken houses blown to
     flinders by dynamite or some other explosive. About one
     hundred chickens were destroyed."

"Just listen to that!" gasped Tom. "Oh, the rascals!"

"And Uncle Randolph's prize stock chickens!" murmured Sam. "That must
have made his heart ache!"

"I'll wager Aunt Martha was scared to death," added Tom. And Dick read
on:

     "Of course there was great excitement, and four of us, the
     detective, Ness, Pop, and myself, went after the rascals,
     leaving your Uncle Randolph to look after your aunt and the
     cook, both of whom were very much frightened. We hunted
     around until daylight, but without success. Then we went to
     the old mill in the auto, but the place was deserted. After
     that I notified the local authorities, and I have hired ten
     watchmen to guard the farm and every building on it. I have
     also sent for two more detectives, and I am hoping that,
     sooner or later, they will be able to trace the scoundrels
     and run them down."

"Does he say how he is feeling?" questioned Sam, as his brother paused
in the reading of the letter.

"Yes, he says he is about the same, but that Uncle Randolph is very much
upset over the loss of his chickens and wants to know if they hadn't
better pay the money demanded."

"Oh, I hope they don't pay a cent!" cried Tom.

"So do I," added Sam. "But I don't want to see them blown up either," he
continued, seriously.

"None of us want that," said Dick. "But I'd not give them a cent--I'd be
blown up a dozen times before I'd do it!" he continued, firmly.

"Do they want us home?" asked Tom.

"No, dad says it will do no good for us to come home. He says he will
write or telegraph if anything new develops. He thinks, with the extra
watchmen on guard, and the detectives at work, Crabtree and Sobber will
get scared and leave them alone."

"I hope they do," said Sam. He heaved a deep sigh. "Gracious! it seems
to me that no sooner are we out of one trouble than we get into
another!"

"That is true."

"It's too bad--to have this piled on poor dad when he's so worried about
that business affair."

"Well, you know the old saying, 'troubles never come singly,'" answered
the older brother.

After that the three boys watched the mails anxiously for over a week.
Then came another letter from their father, in which he stated that
nothing new had developed. Then came another wait--until the day after
that set by Crabtree and Sobber for the delivery of the fifty thousand
dollars,--when Dick got a telegram, as follows:

     "All quiet. Received another letter, to which I have paid no
     attention. Feel almost sure the rascals have left this part
     of the country. All fairly well."

"Well, that's some comfort," was Tom's comment. "I hope they have gone
away, and that we never see or hear of them again."

"Don't comfort yourself that way, Tom," answered Dick. "They are bound
to show their hand again, sooner or later. We won't be safe from them
until they are in jail."




CHAPTER XX

GRACE'S REVELATION


One clear afternoon the three Rover boys decided to take a run up to
Hope Seminary in the _Dartaway_. There was very little wind and,
although it was growing colder, they knew they could easily bundle up in
their aviation coats and boots. Sam and Tom had been trying out the
biplane, and they pronounced everything in perfect order for a flight.

"Dick, let me run the machine over," said Sam, and the big brother
agreed, for Tom had been at the wheel on a previous occasion.

The boys had no classes to attend after lunch and so got away by two
o'clock.

"I trust we can see the girls," said Dick, as they started up the engine
of the flying machine.

"Oh, they'll be at liberty after hours," answered Tom. "They always
are."

Previous to leaving, the boys had filled the oil feed and the gasoline
tank, so they were prepared for quite a trip.

"Maybe we can get the girls to go up, for just a little sail, you know,"
said Sam. "I am sure the _Dartaway_ could carry them, on a pinch."

"Where would they sit, in our laps?" asked Tom, with a grin.

"No, they could sit in the seats and we could sit back of them, like on
a bob-sled," answered the youngest Rover.

"I don't think they'll care to go up," answered Dick. "They'd be too
scared. As yet, flying machines are hardly built for ladies. But I think
the time will come when they will use them."

As they were in no hurry, the boys took their time in sailing over the
farms and country roads. They did not go up very high, and often saw
farmers and others staring at them, shouting things they could not
catch.

"By and by flying machines will be as common as autos," remarked Dick.
"But now the sight of one is a great curiosity to these folks."

Sam handled the machine like a veteran and even showed what he could do
by making a small figure eight and a spiral dip.

"I wish we had a little monoplane, just for one," he said. "My! couldn't
a fellow scoot around then!"

"Sam's got the flying bee all right!" cried Tom.

"Well, wouldn't you like it yourself?" demanded the youngest Rover.

"I'd rather have a big airship. Then I could give all my friends a
ride--have a regular airship party."

"Well, I'd like that too," was Sam's reply.

Presently they came in sight of the seminary buildings. They circled
around for some time and then landed at the far end of the campus. A few
girls were in sight, but not those they had come to visit.

"Good afternoon," said Dick, to a girl he had met, named Ida Strong.
"Can you tell me where I can find Miss Stanhope, or the Misses Laning?"

"The three of them went for a walk, about half an hour ago," replied Ida
Strong.

"Do you know where they went?"

"I do not, excepting that they took the road to Beechwood," and the girl
student pointed out the highway mentioned, one that ran through the big
woods back of the seminary. It led to the village of Beechwood, which
was several miles beyond.

"Thank you," returned Dick. "If we shouldn't meet them, will you tell
them we called, in our biplane?"

"I will," said the girl.

Dick was about to rejoin his brothers, and suggest that they go up and
fly along over the woods road, when another girl, named Bess Haven, came
running up.

"Oh, Mr. Rover, isn't this queer!" she cried. "I thought you were hurt!"

"Hurt?" repeated Dick, puzzled. "How so?"

"Why Dora Stanhope said you were--that you had had a fall out of the
flying machine."

"That I fell out of the machine?" cried Dick. "There is some mistake
here. I have had no fall. When did she tell you that?"

"About half an hour ago. She got some sort of a message, and she was
terribly upset. She went off to visit you."

"Where to?"

"I don't know. But wait--yes, she did say you had had a fall in the
woods."

"Did she go alone?" And now Dick's heart began to thump strangely. He
was thinking of their many enemies. Was this some new trick?

"No, Nellie and Grace Laning, her cousins, went with her."

Dick turned to Ida Strong.

"You saw them go?"

"Yes, just as I told you. Oh, Mr. Rover, is anything wrong?"

"I don't know--I hope not. But I think we had better go after them at
once. Good day." And Dick fairly ran back to where Tom and Sam rested
near the biplane.

"Start her up, quick!" he said to his brothers, in a low voice.
"Something is wrong! We've got to get after the girls right away!"

"What is it?" demanded Tom, leaping to his feet, while Sam did the same.

"I'll tell you when we are on the way. Quick, start the propellers! I'll
take the wheel," and Dick sprang into the seat.

In another moment the engine had been started, and with a rush and a
whizz the _Dartaway_ left the campus. Dick made a turn, then headed in
the direction of the road through the woods. He flew low and rather
slowly.

"Keep your eyes open," he cautioned, "for any sight of the girls--or any
sight of our enemies." And then he related as much as he knew of what
had occurred.

"Do you think somebody sent that message to decoy Dora away from the
seminary, Dick?" asked Sam.

"Doesn't it look that way? Why should anybody send word that I was hurt,
when I wasn't?"

"I think you are right!" declared Tom. "I think I can see through it,"
he went on quickly. "They found out they couldn't dynamite dad or Uncle
Randolph into giving up that money, and they couldn't get at Mrs.
Stanhope or Mrs. Laning to get it, so now they are going to see what
they can do through Dora--and maybe Nellie and Grace."

"That's exactly the way I figure it!" exclaimed Dick. "And the sooner we
reach the girls the better! For all we know, it may even now be too
late!"

"Oh, let us hope not!" cried Sam.

"Did they go on foot?" asked Tom.

"Yes."

"Were they to meet anybody?"

"I don't know. Miss Haven said they went off in a great hurry--which was
natural, if they thought I had tumbled out of the biplane and been hurt.
I suppose poor Dora was scared half to death," and Dick heaved a long
sigh.

As the flying machine swept along over the woods and the roadway the
three youths kept their eyes on the alert for a sight of the girls. For
a long time they saw nothing out of the ordinary. Then Sam uttered a
cry:

"See! see! There is Grace! She is waving her handkerchief at us!"

All looked in the direction indicated, and at a spot along the road
where there was quite a cleared space they saw Grace Laning standing on
a flat rock, waving frantically at them. They had to make a circle, and
then, with care, Dick brought the biplane down into the roadway.

"What is it, Grace?" yelled Sam, as he leaped from his seat. "Where are
the others?"

"Oh, Sam!" moaned the girl, and then they saw that her hair was awry and
her shoes were covered with dust. "Oh, save them! Go after them at
once!" And then she staggered forward and fainted in Sam's arms.

The three Rovers were greatly alarmed and for the moment did not know
what to do. Then Dick rushed to the side of the roadway, where some
water trickled along in a hollow, and brought some, using a collapsible
cup they carried when on a trip. With this they bathed Grace's face and
they forced a little water into her mouth, and soon she opened her eyes
and stared around her.

"Go away! Go away! Don't touch me!" she gasped.

"Hush, Grace, you are safe," answered Sam, gently.

"Oh, Sam! I forgot!" She struggled to her feet, he still supporting her.
"Did--did you find them? Did you bring them back?" she asked wildly.

"You mean Dora and Nellie?" asked Dick and Tom, in a breath.

"Yes! yes!"

"We don't know where they are. Tell us about it," went on Dick.

"Oh, it's terrible!" cried Grace, and now the tears began to course down
her cheeks. "We got a note--at least Dora did--stating you had had a
fall from the biplane and were hurt. The note was signed 'Tom,' and we
of course thought Tom had sent it. It said to keep the matter quiet but
to come without delay--down this road to the old white cottage. So the
three of us started off as soon as we could. Dora was so afraid it was
serious she ran nearly all the way, and Nellie and I ran, too. We had
thought you were at the cottage, but when we got there we didn't see
anybody. While we hunted around a big touring car, one of the kind with
a closed coach top, dashed up. There was a man running the car and
another man inside, a fellow who looked like a doctor. The driver asked
if we were the girls who had come to see Dick Rover, the aviator, and we
said yes. Then he said the car had been sent for us and for the doctor,
and for us to get in and he would take us to Dick Rover at once. We got
in, and then, before we knew it, the touring car was rushing along the
road at a great rate of speed. We asked the doctor about you, Dick, but
he said he hadn't seen you yet. Then we asked the driver, but he acted
so queer we began to get suspicious. Then, oh, wasn't it strange? Nellie
saw a card on the floor of the car, and picked it up, and it was Josiah
Crabtree's visiting card! She showed it to Dora and I, and Dora
screamed, and wanted to leap out of the car. But the doctor--if he was a
doctor--held her, and held Nellie, too. But I was too much for him. I
don't know how I did it, but, just as we were rounding a curve rather
slowly, I flung myself out of the door, and I landed in some bushes. I
got scratched a little, as you can see, but I wasn't hurt, and I started
to run back to the seminary and was doing that when I saw your flying
machine. You know the rest." And now Grace stopped, too exhausted to say
another word.

"And the touring car went on?" queried Dick.

"Yes! yes! I saw the man shut the door, too. Oh, Dick, they have carried
poor Nellie and Dora off, just as they carried Dora's mother off!"

"They kept to this road?"

"I believe so. I don't know of any cross road this side of Beechwood."

"Then we'll get after them at once!" declared Dick. "Sam, do you want to
take Grace back, or come with us?"

"Well--I--er----"

"Go with them, Sam--they may need you!" broke in the girl quickly. "I
can go back alone, and I'll send word to the authorities, over the
telephone. Hurry! hurry, or it will be too late!"

The boys needed no further urging. Dick and Tom ran for the flying
machine, and soon the explosions of the motor filled the crisp autumn
air. Then all the boys leaped on board. Dick was at the wheel, and he
sent the _Dartaway_ along at a good rate of speed. Sam looked back, to
see Grace hurrying in the direction of Hope Seminary.

"I hope she gets back safely," he said anxiously.

"I think she will," answered Tom. "Those rascals are all further along
the road--waiting for Nellie and Dora."

"Keep your eyes open," put in Dick. "Don't let anything escape you. We
must spot that auto without fail!"




CHAPTER XXI

FOLLOWING DORA AND NELLIE


The nerves of the Rover boys were on edge. Dick and Tom were
particularly anxious, for those who had been thus rudely carried off
were very dear to them.

"I wonder who that so-called doctor was?" mused Sam, as the DARTAWAY
sailed along, keeping over the road as well as the windings through the
dense woods permitted.

"Most likely some tool of Crabtree or Sobber, or both," answered Tom.

"Do you think Koswell and Larkspur are in this game?"

"Perhaps they are!" cried Dick. "It would be just like them to join
forces with Crabtree and Sobber. They are down and out, and need money,
and all of them would expect to get a big stake out of this."

"Then you think they carried the girls off for money?" questioned Tom.

"I do, Tom. You hit the truth when you said they found out they couldn't
do anything at the farm, and couldn't reach Mrs. Stanhope and Mrs.
Laning. The only things left were to try to reach us or the girls."

"And they didn't dare tackle us," put in Sam.

"Do you suppose that Mrs. Sobber is in this?" continued Tom, referring
to a relative of Tad Sobber, who had assisted once in the carrying off
of Mrs. Stanhope.

"She may be, although she was pretty well scared that other time,"
replied his older brother.

The boys relapsed into silence, each busy with his own thoughts. All
were anxious to catch a glimpse of the enclosed touring car. But they
came within sight of the village of Beechwood without encountering a
turnout of any sort.

"I'll land here and make some inquiries," said Dick.

"Yes, if the auto went through here somebody must have seen it," said
Tom.

A landing was made directly on the village green, in front of the
post-office, and a small crowd quickly collected.

"It's them young fellers from Brill!" cried one of the villagers. "I
heard tell they had an airship."

"That ain't no airship, it's an aryplane," said another. "They don't
lift up like no balloon--they sail like a bird, on them canvas wings."

"Wot makes the thing go, Job?"

"Them wooden things. They go 'round like windmills."

"Say, we want some information and we want it quick!" cried Dick. "Have
any of you seen a big auto go through here, an enclosed auto--one with a
coach-like body?"

"Sure we did!" cried one of the villagers. "By heck! the thing nearly
killed Si Levering, it did! Si was crossin' the road, when whizz! bang!
shoo! that auto went past him like a streak o' greased lightnin'! Si
jumped back an' sit hisself down in the waterin' trough an' got hisself
all wet."

"Which way did the auto go?" went on Dick.

"Right straight ahead."

"No, it didn't nuther," put in a farmer, who had just arrived in the
village. "It took the road to Shepleytown--I see it."

"Which is that?" questioned Tom.

"You go up this road about a mile an' then take the cross road to the
left. You can't miss it, 'cause there's a big tree on the corner that
was struck by lightnin'."

"All right, we'll go to the corner that was struck by lightning," said
Tom, who could not help joking, even in that moment of anxiety.

"I didn't say the corner was struck--it was the tree," explained the
farmer soberly.

"All right, much obliged," answered Tom; and then the three boys started
up the engine once more. The villagers had crowded around, but as those
explosions rent the air several leaped back, and then the whole crowd
ran for their lives.

"She's goin' up!" one yelled.

"Is the engine goin' to bust?" asked another.

"Look out, Jim, or she'll mow ye down like a mowin' machine!"

"Clear the track!" cried Sam, and then, with the usual rush and roar,
the _Dartaway_ leaped over the village green and arose in the air,
leaving the gaping and wondering crowd behind.

It was an easy run up to the blasted tree, and sighting this, Dick
headed the biplane along the road that led to Shepleytown.

"How far is that place?" asked Sam.

"I think it is about six or seven miles," answered Tom. "I was there
once, on a bicycle--went after nuts with Stanley and Songbird."

"What, to the town?" questioned Sam, with a grin.

"No, the woods back of the town, Sam. Say, that's one on me,--as bad as
that countryman's struck-by-lightning corner," and Tom grinned, too.

On and on swept the flying machine, the boys watching every rod of the
winding road below. Once Tom gave a cry, as they saw a turnout at a
distance. But it proved to be nothing but a tinware peddler's wagon. On
the ground lay various pieces of tinware, scattering over a distance of
fifty feet.

"Look at that!" cried Sam. "He must have had an accident."

"Say, maybe that auto struck his wagon," exclaimed Tom.

"It looks that way," was Dick's comment.

"Shall we land and question him?"

"What's the use? We know the machine came this way. That's enough for
the present. We don't want to lose a minute more than is necessary."

"Say, we were chumps that we didn't telephone ahead from Beechwood!"
cried Sam. "We might have had that auto stopped when it went through
Shepleytown."

"It couldn't be done, for there is no line from Beechwood to
Shepleytown," answered Dick. "The line only runs the other way."

The route was now over a dense woods and the boys had to sail slowly,
for fear of passing the automobile while the latter was running under
the overhanging trees. Once they saw something that looked like an
automobile and Dick had to sail in a circle and come back, to make sure.
But it proved to be only a two-seated carriage; and they passed on.

Shepleytown proved to be quite a place, with a main street containing a
dozen stores. It connected by stage with Chaplet, which was a railroad
center, five miles away.

The coming of the boys created as much of a sensation as had their
arrival at Beechwood, and once more the biplane was surrounded.

"Sure, I saw that 'mobile you are after," said one man, in answer to
their questions. "It was running putty lively an' no mistake. It went
past the mill an' took the old Snagtown road. Queer, too, 'cause that
road ain't half as good as the Chaplet turnpike."

"Did you see who was in the auto?" queried Dick.

"I think a couple o' men an' some girls. I couldn't see very well, the
machine run so fast. I had to hold my hoss, for I was afraid they'd run
into me."

Several others had also seen the big enclosed touring car and all were
sure it had taken to the old Snagtown road.

"Where does that road run to?" asked Dick.

"Goes over the hills to what used to be Snagtown," answered one of the
men. "But there ain't no town now, since the mills closed down--only
empty houses."

"Just the place they'd be likely to head for!" cried Tom, in a low voice
to his brothers. "Come on, hurry up!"

Sam and Dick needed no urging, and having thanked the men for their
information they started up the engine once more.

"How far is it to that deserted village?" called out Tom, as the
_Dartaway_ was about to move off.

"Six miles!" shouted one of the crowd. "That is, by the road. The way
you're going it ain't more'n four!" And this answer made the crowd
laugh.

"Four miles," murmured Dick. "We ought to be able to head them off."

"I wish we were armed," came from Tom. "We may have some desperate
characters to deal with."

"We might go back and get pistols," suggested Sam.

Dick thought for a moment. He knew well how desperate their enemies
might become. He hated to lose the time but he realized it would be
worse than useless to face a gang of four or more empty-handed. There
was no telling what Sobber, Crabtree and the others might do if
cornered.

"I guess we'd better go back and arm ourselves," he said. "It will
create talk, but that can't be helped."

"It will create talk anyway, as soon as it is known that Dora and Nellie
have been carried off," answered Tom.

"What do you care for the talk!" cried Sam. "What we want to do is to
save the girls--and put those rascals where they belong, in jail!"

Then the biplane was turned back in a circle and soon the boys were back
in Shepleytown, much to the astonishment of those who had but a few
moments before seen them leave.




CHAPTER XXII

OVER THE BIG WOODS


"Is there a hardware store handy?" asked Dick, of the first man who came
up. He had told his brothers to let him do the talking.

"Sure--Bill Simmons's place, just down the street," answered the man,
pointing with his finger.

"Thank you. Tom, bring that five-gallon gasoline can with you. Sam, you
mind the machine," went on Dick, loudly.

"All right," answered the brothers, and Tom got the can in question, and
he and Dick started for the store.

"Humph! got to have gasoline to run 'em, eh?" said one of the men, to
Sam.

"Yes, indeed," answered the youngest Rover.

"Well, Bill Simmons can give ye all ye want, pervidin' ye pay for it,"
chuckled the man. "He keeps gasoline fer auto fellers an' fer farmers as
has gasoline engines."

Dick and Tom hurried to the hardware store and asked the proprietor
about gasoline. While he was filling the can they looked at an
assortment of pistols that were exhibited in a showcase.

"They look pretty good," said Dick, when the hardware man came towards
them.

"Are good, too. Wouldn't you like to buy a good shooter?" he added,
anxious to do business.

"Show me a really good five-shooter," said Dick, and several were
quickly handed over. He selected one and Tom selected another.

"Have to get one for Sam, too," whispered Tom.

"Sure," replied his brother, and this was done, and they also purchased
the necessary cartridges.

"Now you are well armed--if anybody tries to steal your airship," said
Bill Simmons.

"We don't want the machine stolen, or tampered with," answered Dick. "We
can't afford to take chances. If a fellow tampered with our machine it
might go wrong when it was in the air and we'd get our necks broken."
And then Dick and Tom hurried back to the _Dartaway_ carrying the can of
gasoline between them. The can was fastened where it belonged,--for the
regular tank had still plenty of gasoline in it,--and then the boys
sailed away once more, over the winding road leading to Snagtown.

"That's a dandy revolver!" exclaimed Sam, on receiving one of the
weapons, with some cartridges. "And loaded, too! Now I guess we are
ready for those rascals!" he added, with satisfaction.

"Remember, we are not to use any firearms unless it becomes absolutely
necessary," said Dick, firmly.

"Yes, but I am not going to give them a chance to down me and get away
with Nellie!" cried Tom, stoutly.

"Oh, no, Tom! We'll not allow that!" returned his big brother, with
equal firmness.

"It seems to be getting a bit cloudy," said Sam, a minute later. "Wonder
if it will rain?"

"I don't think that is rain, Sam," answered Dick. "It's worse than that,
for us."

"You mean wind?"

"Yes."

Dick was right, and presently the first puff of the coming breeze hit
the _Dartaway_ and sent the aircraft up on a slant. Dick promptly moved
the tips and one of the rudders, and the flying machine came along on a
level. But from then on the oldest Rover boy had all he could do to keep
to the course, for the breeze became stronger and stronger.

"It's too bad!" murmured Tom, as he clung to his seat. "Hang the luck!
Why couldn't that wind have kept off for an hour longer!"

"You fellows keep your eyes on the road!" sang out Dick. "I've got to
give all my attention to the biplane!"

"All right," was the answer of the others.

After that but little was said, for Dick had to watch every movement of
the _Dartaway_ with care, and his hands and feet were constantly on the
alert, to make whatever shift seemed necessary. Sam and Tom strained
their eyes to catch sight of the enclosed touring car, which, they had
learned, was painted a dark blue.

The wind kept growing stronger and stronger, coming in fitful gusts that
were particularly bad for such a flying machine as the boys possessed.
Once came a gust that sent them spinning far out of their course.

"Phew! this is getting pretty wild!" gasped Sam. "Dick, can you manage
her?"

"Not if it gets any worse," was the grim answer.

"Don't take too much of a chance," put in Tom. "We don't want to get
wrecked in this wilderness."

His reference to a wilderness was not without reason, for below them
stretched a series of hills and valleys covered with stunted trees and
clumps of brushwood. Not a house was in sight.

"This is what you'd call Lonesomehurst," murmured Sam.

"Do you see any place where we can land?" was Dick's question, a little
later, after he had battled with another angry gust and then run through
a particularly trying "soft spot."

"Nothing around here," answered Tom.

"I see something of a clearing over to the left," came from Sam. "I
don't know what it amounts to though, it's too far off."

"We'll look at it," said Dick, in a low voice.

He had to fairly battle his way along, so fierce were the gusts of wind.
He made something of an oval, and presently found himself over a spot
covered with grass and low bushes. Then came another gust of wind and
without waiting longer he shut off the engine, and the _Dartaway_ came
down with a bump that threatened to break the wheels on which it rested.
They swept through the bushes, and then tilted up beside several small
trees.

"Hold her down!" shouted Dick. "Tie her fast, before the wind turns her
over!"

All set to work, and, not without great difficulty, they managed to run
the biplane directly between several trees and some clumps of bushes.

"Fasten every rope well," sang out Dick. "Unless I miss my guess, this
is going to be a corker of a blow!"

"I don't think it will be as bad as it was during that hailstorm,"
answered Tom. "But it is bad enough."

The ropes were all well secured, and then the boys breathed easier. Down
on the ground the wind did not appear to be so powerful, and they felt
that, unless it increased greatly, the _Dartaway_ way would be safe in
her berth among the trees and bushes.

"Well, what's the next move?" questioned Sam, after they had rested for
a moment from their labors.

"I hardly know what to say," answered his eldest brother. "We can hardly
follow that auto on foot."

"The worst of it is, it will be growing dark before long," put in Tom.
"What are we going to do then? I thought we'd catch up to that auto long
before this."

They talked the matter over, but could arrive at no satisfactory
conclusion.

"I'm almost sorry we came down," said Dick. "We might have gotten
through--although the wind is worse than it was."

"No, we couldn't do anything in this wind,--we'd simply wreck the
_Dartaway_," said Sam. "But come on, let's go as far as we can. We can
come back for the biplane any time."

While under such a strain of mind, the boys could not remain quiet, and
so they set off through the woods in the direction of the road. It was
hard walking, and several times they had to literally force their way
through the brushwood. Then they came to a swamp and had to make a
detour, for fear of getting stuck in the mud. When they at last reached
the road they were well-nigh exhausted.

"I'll have to rest just a minute!" panted Sam. "Say, that was something
fierce, wasn't it?" And he sank on a rock.

"Listen! I think I hear somebody coming!" cried Dick.

All strained their ears, and presently made out the sounds of a farm
wagon moving slowly over the rocky roadway that was hidden by the trees.
Then the turnout came into view, loaded with freshly-cut cord wood, and
drawn by a pair of bony, white horses. On the seat of the wagon sat an
aged colored man, talking volubly to his team.

"Hello there, uncle!" cried Dick, as the wagon came closer. "Stop a
minute, I want to talk to you."

"What you-all wants?" demanded the colored man nervously, for the spot
was a particularly lonely one.

"Did you come from the direction of Snagtown?" went on Dick.

"Dat's wot I did, sah."

"Did you see anything of a big automobile going that way, one with a
coach top?"

At this question the aged colored man blinked his eyes and shifted
uneasily. He glanced back, over his load of wood.

"I--I ain't got nuffin to say, boss, I ain't got nuffin to say!" he
answered finally, and prepared to drive on.

"Oh, yes, you have got something to say--and you are going to say it!"
cried Dick, and he ran forward, in front of the horses, and caught hold
of one by the bit.




CHAPTER XXIII

AT CLOSE QUARTERS


"Say, you dun let my hosses alone!" cried the colored man, in fright.

"Don't you dare to drive away until you have answered our questions,"
returned Dick, firmly.

"I--I don't want to git in no trouble, boss--'deed I don't!" wailed the
driver of the farm wagon.

"Well, you answer our questions, and tell us the strict truth."

"I--I didn't do nuffin, give you-all my word I didn't!"

"But you saw the auto, with the men and the girls in it?" cried Dick,
sharply.

"Ye-as, sah, I--I did, sah," was the stammered-out reply.

"Where did you see them?"

"Down in Snagtown, sah."

"What were the folks in the auto doing?"

"Da was a-waitin' fo' one of de men to fix up de wheel. De rubber on de
wheel dun got busted."

"I see. And what were the men in the auto, and the girls, doing?" went
on Dick, quickly.

"Say, boss, I don't want no trouble, 'deed I don't! I didn't do nuffin!
I jess looked at' em, dat's all. An' dat one man he said he'd mak me
suffer if I opened my mouf 'bout wot I saw," explained the aged colored
man, in a trembling voice. "I'se an honest, hard-workin' man, I is! I
works fo' Massah Sheldon fo' sixteen years now, an' he'll dun tole
yo'-all I'se honest, an----"

"All right, I believe you are honest," answered Dick, in a kindlier
tone. "But those men are rascals, and we want to catch them. They
carried those two girls off against their will."

"Dat's wot I was suspicioned of, boss, fo' de young ladies was a-cryin'
hard an' wanted to git out, an' de men wouldn't let 'em. I wanted to do
sumfing fo' 'em, but the men tole me go mind my own business, or git my
haid busted, so I drove on."

"How many men were there?"

"Three men, 'sides de man wot was a-mendin' de busted wheel."

"The doctor and Crabtree and Sobber!" murmured Tom.

"Or Koswell and Larkspur," added Sam.

"How far away from here is that place?" went on Dick.

"About a mile an' a half, sah. But the road am putty stony an' rough,
sah."

"Can a fellow ride horseback on those horses?"

"Yo' might, sah, if yo' had a saddle. But da ain't no saddle. Is yo'-all
thinkin' of goin'----"

"We'll take those horses," cut in Dick, shortly. "Now, don't worry,
we'll pay you well for using them, and see that they come back safely.
We have got to save those two girls, and we'll put those men in prison
if we can."

The old colored man was so amazed that he was all but bewildered. He did
not want to let the horses go, but the boys gave him no choice in the
matter. They unharnessed the steeds, and took the blankets on the wagon
seat for saddles.

"Sam, I guess Tom and I had better go on ahead," said Dick. "You can
follow on foot, if you want to, and you can come, too, if you wish," he
added, to the colored man.

"Say, ain't you afraid ob gitting shot, or sumfing like dat?" asked the
driver of the wagon.

"Maybe we can do a little shooting ourselves," answered Dick, grimly.

"Is yo'-all armed?"

"We are."

"Den I'll follow on foot, wid dis young gen'men," said the colored man.
He was afraid that if he did not follow he would not get the team back.

Once on horseback, Dick and Tom did not linger. Along the rough, hill
road they sped, urging the bony steeds along as best they could.
Fortunately there were no side trails to bewilder them.

"I hope we get there in time," remarked Tom, as they proceeded.

"So do I," answered Dick. "If they had a blow-out it may take that
chauffeur quite some time to put on a new inner tube and a shoe."

"If he had only busted his engine!" murmured Tom.

The way now became so rough that they had all they could do to keep on
the horses, and they wondered at the men in the automobile traveling
such a road.

"I suppose they came because it's so lonely," said Dick. "They knew
they'd be sure to meet more or less carriages and wagons on the
turnpike, and if the girls screamed they might be rescued."

At last they topped a hill and could see, on the top of the next hill, a
deserted house, the first of the deserted village of Snagtown. This made
them renew their efforts, and soon they were struggling up the hill
towards the house.

"Hark!" burst out Tom, suddenly. "What's that?"

"An engine!" exclaimed his brother. "They must have started up their
auto!"

"If that's the case, the wheel must be mended!"

"Yes! Come on, there is no time to lose!"

Past the deserted house they rode, and then around a turn where were
located several other houses and barns. Then they came in sight of the
deserted mill, down in a hollow by a stream. Further still was a bridge
and not far from this structure stood a big, enclosed touring car
painted dark blue!

"There it is! There's the auto!" cried Dick.

"And they are starting up!" added his brother. "Hi! stop! Stop, you
rascals!" he yelled.

The horses clattered through the lonely street of the deserted village
and the noise they made and the shouting, made those in the automobile
look back.

"Two men on horseback!" cried one of the men.

"The Rover boys, Dick and Tom!" exclaimed another. "Hurry up!"

"It's old Crabtree!" cried Dick, as he saw the head of that individual
thrust out of the touring car. "And Tad Sobber!" he added, as a
second head appeared.

[Illustration: JUST AS THE MACHINE REACHED THE OTHER SIDE, THE BRIDGE
WENT DOWN WITH A CRASH.--_Page_ 228.]

"Stop! stop, you rascals!" continued Tom. "Don't you dare to go another
step!"

"Save us! Save us!" came in girlish voices from the interior of the
touring car. "Oh, Dick! Oh, Tom! Save us!"

"Hurry up--start her up!" screamed Tad Sobber frantically, to the
chauffeur. "Put on all power!"

The driver was already in his seat and the motor was humming loudly. He
threw in the low gear, and off the touring car started slowly. After it
clattered Dick and Tom, still a hundred feet in the rear.

"Let me get out!" screamed Dora. "Oh, let me get out!"

"Yes! Yes!" pleaded Nellie. "Please let us get out!"

"Stop your noise and sit still!" commanded Josiah Crabtree. And he and
Sobber and the third fellow forced the two girls back on the seat.

Dick and Tom urged the horses forward with all speed. But before they
could reach the touring car, the chauffeur threw in second speed and
then quickly changed to high, and away the automobile rattled, over the
rickety bridge. The structure had not been built for such a weight,
and, just as the machine reached the other side, the bridge went down
with a crash.

"Look out!" yelled Dick, and the warning came none too soon, for both he
and Tom were almost on the bridge. They turned their horses just in
time, came to a sudden halt in some bushes, and stared blankly at each
other.

"Gone!" cried Tom, hollowly. "Oh, what luck!"

"Quick, your pistol, Tom!" cried Dick, suddenly.

"But the girls----" began the other.

"Don't shoot at the car, shoot at the tires," explained Dick. And then
he whipped out his own weapon, got into range, and began to blaze away.

Each of the boys fired three shots. One hit the back lamp of the
automobile, smashing the red glass, and another hit the differential
case and glanced off. But the wheels remained untouched, and in a few
seconds the big touring car was out of sight around a bend. The lads
heard a scream from the two girls, and then all that reached their
strained ears was the sound of the motor, growing fainter and fainter,
until it died out altogether.

Dick and Tom felt sick at heart. They had been so near to rescuing the
girls, and now they seemed as far off as ever! Each heaved a deep sigh.

"I suppose we can't follow them, with the bridge down," said Tom.

"We might ford the stream," said Dick. "But what would be the use of
trying to follow on horseback? They know we are after them and they will
put on all the speed possible."

"Well, what's to do next, Dick?"

"I don't know."

"I'm not going to sit still and do nothing."

"Neither am I, Tom. But what to do next I really don't know."




CHAPTER XXIV

AT THE SWAMP


"Where are they? Didn't you catch up to them? Who fired those shots?"

It was Sam who shouted the words, as he came up on a run, followed by
the aged negro.

"They got away," answered Dick, bitterly. "We were just a minute too
late!"

"Can't you go after them?"

"Not on horseback, Sam."

"And, if the horses were all right, look there!" cried Tom, and pointed
to the fallen bridge.

"Down! What did it, the auto?"

"Yes."

"Fo' de lan' sake!" burst out the negro farm hand. "De bridge hab gone
bust down! Say, how is we-all to git ober dat stream after dis?"

"I give it up," said Tom. "The authorities will have to rebuild it, I
guess."

"Nobudy ain't gwine to do dat, boss. Kase why? Kase dis road was built
fo' de mill an' de people wot lived heah. Now de mill ain't runnin' an'
de people moved away, da ain't much use fo' the road, an' nobuddy ain't
gwine to put up de bridge--an' Ike Henry, dat's me, has got to tote
things 'round by de udder road after dis!" he added ruefully.

"Well, we can't bother about the bridge," replied Dick. "The authorities
can fight it out with those fellows who are running the auto."

"But the shots?" queried Sam. He had dropped on a flat rock to rest.

"We tried to hit the tires--but we failed," explained Tom. "The auto was
moving too fast, and the trees and bushes were in the way. Besides, we
didn't want to hit the girls."

Dick and Tom walked down to the stream. It was not very deep and they
concluded that they could easily get to the other side, by leaping from
one bit of wreckage to another,--thus keeping from getting wet,--for at
that season of the year the water was decidedly cold.

"Let us go over and climb to the top of the next hill," said Dick. "We
may be able to see which direction the auto takes."

The others were willing, and telling the colored man to wait a while for
them, and promising him good pay, they climbed over the sunken bridge to
the other shore of the stream. Then they raced along the rocky road,
around a bend, and up a steep hill that all but winded them.

"I see the machine!" cried Tom, who was the first to top the rise.
"Look!" And he pointed with his hand, down in the valley that lay
stretched out before them like a map in the gathering darkness.

At a great distance, moving at a fair rate of speed, was the enclosed
touring car containing Dora and Nellie and their abductors. It was
headed for a distant main road, lined here and there with farmhouses and
outbuildings. Presently it turned into this mainroad, and started
westward, at an increased rate of speed.

"My, see them streak along!" murmured Sam.

"They are evidently going to put as much distance as they can between
themselves and us," returned Tom.

"Say, do you see any telephone wires?" asked Dick, anxiously.

"Not a wire," came from his brothers, after a long look for lines and
poles.

"Neither do I. I guess they haven't any connections at those farmhouses,
so it will be useless to walk there."

"But what shall we do, Dick?" asked Tom, impatiently. "We can't sit
still and do nothing!"

"We'll go back to the _Dartaway_ and fly after them."

"But the wind----" began Sam.

"It has gone down a little, I think, Sam. And anyway, we've got to take
a chance--it's the only thing left. If you don't want to go----"

"Dick, stop right there! If you go I'll go," cried the youngest Rover,
firmly. "I'm as much interested in this as anybody, even though Grace
isn't there," he added, with a show of color in his round cheeks.

But little more was said just then. The three boys ran down the hill to
the stream and crawled back over the wreckage.

"I guess those horses can carry the lot of us," said Dick; and so it was
arranged, Dick and Sam getting on the back of one steed and Tom and Ike
Henry on the other. The boys asked the colored man about telephone
connections, but he could give them little information excepting to
state that his employer had no such convenience.

At last the boys reached the spot where they had come out of the woods
after leaving the _Dartaway_ and skirting the swamp.

"Have you a lantern on the wagon?" asked Dick, of Ike Henry.

"Yes, sah."

"Then we'll have to buy or borrow it, my man. Supposing I give you two
dollars for the use of the horses and another dollar for the lantern,
how will that strike you?"

"Dat's all right, boss," answered Ike Henry, who remembered that the
lantern had cost but seventy-five cents.

Dick passed over the bills and received the lantern, which was filled
with oil, and also a box of matches, which Ike Henry chanced to carry.

"Wot you-all gwine to do now?" asked the colored man, as he prepared to
hitch up his team again.

"We are going back into the woods, where we left our flying machine,"
answered Tom.

"You-all be careful dat yo' don't git in de swamp. Dat am a terribul bad
spot."

"We'll be careful."

"Tell me, where does that mainroad on the other side of the river run
to?" put in Dick.

"Dat road?" queried Ike Henry. "Dat way or dat way?" and he motioned
first to the east and then to the west.

"I mean to the westward."

"Why, dat's de way to git to Sherodburg an' Fremville."

"Do you know how far those places are?"

"Sherodburg am 'bout eight miles; Fremville am 'bout twenty or moah."

"All right. Come on, boys," said Dick. "Good night, Ike."

"Good night, sah! Much erbliged!" cried the aged colored man. "Hope
yo'-all dun catch dem rascals," he added earnestly.

"We'll do our best," answered Tom.

In a few seconds more the Rover boys had plunged into the woods. Here it
was quite dark, and Dick took the lead, holding the lantern close to the
ground, so that he might follow the trail he and his brothers had made
on leaving the _Dartaway_. All were gratified to find that the wind had
died down completely.

"I don't know how a run in the darkness will go," said Dick. "But we can
try it. But I don't see how we are to steer."

"I've got my pocket compass with me," answered Sam. "That may help some.
We know those towns are west of us. We can sail along until we see the
lights and then go down and ask about the touring car."

"A good idea, Sam."

Skirting the swamp with only the rays from the lantern to aid them was
no easy task, and once Tom slipped from a clump of rushes and went down
over his ankles in soft mud.

"Hi! hi! help me out!" he yelled. "Quick, before I get in any deeper!"

"Stand still!" called back Dick, and placed the lantern in another clump
of rushes. Then he caught hold of a tree that was handy and took a grip
on Sam's hand. "Now catch hold of Tom," he went on, and the youngest
Rover did so. Then came a long and strong pull, and with a sucking
sound, poor Tom came out of the sticky mud and landed beside his
brothers.

"Wow! that's a mess!" said the fun-loving Rover, as he surveyed his
feet, plastered thick with the mud.

"Stick to the dry ground after this," advised Dick. "Come on, the dead
leaves will soon brush that mud off." And forward he went once more,
holding the lantern as before. In a little while after this the swamp
was left behind, and then progress through the woods was more agreeable.

"Dick, don't you think we ought to be getting to the _Dartaway_ pretty
soon?" asked Tom, after a quarter of an hour more had passed and they
were still moving forward.

"Yes."

"It didn't seem so far away as this," put in Sam. "Are you sure you are
following the trail?"

"You can see for yourselves," answered Dick, and held the lantern close
to the ground.

"Footsteps, sure enough," murmured Tom. Then of a sudden he bent
closer. "But look!" he cried. "They are not ours!"

"What?" exclaimed his two brothers, in surprise.

"These footprints are not ours--they are altogether too big. We have
picked up and are following the wrong trail!"




CHAPTER XXV

THE TRAIL OF THE TOURING CAR


All started in astonishment at the footprints before them. What Tom had
said was true--the prints were altogether too large to have been made by
their own feet in walking through the woods.

"How could I have made such a mistake!" murmured Dick.

"I wonder where you got mixed up?" said Sam. "I looked at the prints
down by the swamp. They seemed to be O. K. there."

"Then that is where I must have gotten mixed up--maybe after we pulled
Tom from the mud."

"We'll have to go back," came from Tom. "Too bad! But it can't be
helped. I don't blame you, Dick," he added, hastily.

"Neither do I," put in Sam. "Anybody might make such a mistake, with
nothing but that smoky lantern to guide him."

They turned back, and after a while reached the edge of the swamp. Here,
after a long search, they found their own footprints.

"Now we are all right!" cried Sam. "Come on!"

"Yes, and let us be careful that we don't make another mistake," added
Tom.

"I don't know about this," said Dick, hesitatingly. "Somehow, it doesn't
look altogether right to me."

"Why not?" queried his two brothers.

"It doesn't seem to be the right direction. But they are our footprints,
so we may as well follow them."

They went on and proceeded for several hundred feet in silence. Then Tom
uttered a cry of dismay.

"Well, this beats the Dutch!" he gasped.

"What's wrong now?" asked Dick.

"Do you know what we are doing? We are heading for the road again,
instead of for the place where we left the _Dartaway_!"

"Tom!" gasped Sam. "Are you sure?"

"I am. See that fallen tree? We are about half way between the road and
the swamp."

"Yes, I remember the tree, and you are right," said Dick. "This is too
bad! And when we are in such a hurry, too!" His voice had a note of
despair in it.

"Well, keep to this trail now," said Sam. "Don't miss it,--only follow
it backwards."

Once more the three Rover boys turned, and now they scanned every foot
of the trail with care. Again they passed the swamp and there discovered
how they had made a false turn. Then they hurried forward, under the
trees and through the bushes.

The darkness of night had closed in all around them, and the only light
was that of the smoky lantern, and from the few stars that shone down
through the tree tops. Everything was silent, excepting for the
occasional note of a tree toad, or the "glunk" of a frog in the swamp.

"We ought to be there by now," said Sam, a few minutes later.

"There she is!" cried Dick, swinging the lamp up over his head. And in
the widening circle of light the three youths beheld the biplane,
resting exactly as they had left the craft.

"Thank goodness!" cried Tom. "I was beginning to think we had made
another mistake."

They hung the lantern on a tree limb and then lit the lights attached to
the biplane, for they had insisted that the _Dartaway_ be supplied with
these,--not for the purpose of flying at night, but so that the machine
could be lit up in the dark if it rested in the road or in some other
place where some person or vehicle might run into it.

It was an easy task to bring the biplane out into the opening in the
woods, and this done the boys took a general view of the situation, so
that they might get their bearings. Then all but one lantern were
extinguished, and the engine was started up and they got aboard the
craft, Dick taking the wheel.

"Now, Sam, it is up to you to give me the points of the compass," said
Dick. "And, Tom you keep your eyes open for the lights of Sherodburg and
Fremville."

Into the sky with its twinkling stars swept the _Dartaway_, and Sam gave
the direction to be taken by consulting the tiny pocket compass he
carried. Of course these directions were crude, but they were better
than nothing, and soon Tom cried out that he could make out the lights
of a settlement in the dim distance.

"That must be Sherodburg," said Dick.

"Why stop there?" asked Tom. "I don't think the touring car did. More
than likely they streaked through for all they were worth. Why not go on
straight to Fremville? That is a much larger town, and we'll be sure to
find a telephone there, or a telegraph office."

"Just what I was thinking," replied his big brother.

They swept over Sherodburg five minutes later, dipping down so low that
they could see every house and every store. They looked along the main
street for the touring car, but only carriages and farm wagons were in
view.

"I wish we had a searchlight," said Dick, with a sigh. "If we had one we
could easily keep that highway in view all the way to Fremville."

"Well, we haven't one, so we'll have to make out without it," answered
Tom. "Fly as low as you can and we'll try to keep the highway in sight.
Most of the farmhouses have lights in 'em, and that will help a little."

Dick flew as low as seemed advisable, and by straining their eyes the
boys managed to make out the winding road, lined on either side with
farms and patches of woods. Occasionally they swept over small
collections of houses,--hamlets located between the town they had left
behind and the one they were approaching.

The breeze had died down utterly, so Dick had little trouble in
manipulating the biplane. He sent the _Dartaway_ onward at a good rate
of speed, the engine making a noise like a battery of gatling guns. More
than likely many a farmer and his family were astonished at the sounds
and wondered what they meant. If any saw the biplane the Rovers did not
know it.

"I guess we are coming up to Fremville now," said Sam, when the distant
lights of a town showed on the horizon. "We'll have to look for some
safe place to land, and that is not so easy in the darkness."

Dick slowed down the motor as they drew closer to the town, which was
composed of several streets of stores, half a dozen churches, some
schools, and a hundred or more houses. He made a circle, and then,
seeing a level field back of some of the houses, headed for it, and shut
off the engine. They landed without anybody seeing them do it.

"Tom, I think you had better watch the machine, while Sam and I make
some inquiries," said Dick, as he alighted.

"Oh, don't you think I had better go too?" asked Tom anxiously.

"We can't leave the _Dartaway_ alone."

At that moment a man came out of the darkness, attracted by the voices.
He was surprised to see the biplane. He told the lads that his house was
close by and wanted to know what they were doing.

"We are on the trail of a big, enclosed touring car that came this way,"
answered Dick. "Did you see anything of it?"

"Say, that must be the machine Jim Hickey told about!" cried the man.
"Jim said it went tearin' through like mad, about half an hour ago."

"Which way was it headed?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"I don't know--I didn't ask. Jim could tell you."

"Where is he?"

"Jim? Why he keeps the barber shop, down on the corner of Main Street
and Lumber Alley."

"Do you know if he is at his barber shop now?" asked Dick.

"He must be--he was going there when he saw the auto."

The boys waited no longer, but asking the man to look after the
_Dartaway_ during their absence, they hurried to the main street of the
town and then to the barber shop in question. Jim Hickey was busy
shaving a customer but he was willing to suspend operations long enough
to answer the Rover boys.

"Did I see the car?" he cried. "If I hadn't I'd be a dead man this
minit!" he cried. "She was going some, she was!"

"Which way did the car go?" asked all the boys.

"Down Main Street to the bridge and then turned around the church
corner."

"Where does that road lead to?" asked Tom.

"Leads to Plankville and Bulltown."

"Yes, but they can't git through on that road," put in the customer,
wiping the lather from around his mouth so he could talk. "The bridge is
shut off--they're fixin' it--went at the work this morning."

"You are sure about that?" queried Dick, eagerly.

"Sure, I saw 'em takin' up the plankin' of the bridge. They will have to
come back."

"How far is that bridge from here?"

"About three miles."

"Is there any other side road?" put in Sam.

"None that would be good enough for an auto. The north road is all sand
an' mud."

"Come on!" cried Dick to his brothers. "I think we've cornered them!
Come on!" And he rushed from the barber shop, and Sam and Tom followed,
leaving the barber and his customer staring after them in astonishment.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE MOONLIT TRAIL


Once in the street the three Rover boys halted and looked at each other.
The same thought was in the mind of each; should they follow the touring
car on foot, or go back for the airship?

"We'll get the _Dartaway_!" cried Dick. "We can follow them so much more
quickly that way."

At top speed they raced for the spot where they had left the biplane.
They found the strange man on guard, smoking his pipe.

"We saw the barber," said Dick, "and now we are going after that touring
car and the fellows in it. Much obliged for looking after the biplane,"
and he handed the man a silver half dollar.

"Thank you," said the man. "Want to catch 'em, eh?"

"Yes, they are rascals who ought to be in jail," answered Tom. And then,
before the man could ask any more questions, the boys started up the
engine and propellers and swept into the air once more.

The late moon had come up, and this light, added to that of the stars,
made it possible for them to keep the road well in view. Over the town
they swept and then over the church near the bridge. Then they commenced
to follow the road leading to Plankville and Bulltown.

It must be confessed that all of the youths were deeply excited, and Tom
and Sam looked to their pistols, to make certain that the weapons were
ready for use. They felt that the rascals who had abducted Dora and
Nellie in such a high-handed fashion would not give in without a
struggle.

As they went on, Dick slowed down the engine, and ran closer and closer
to the road.

"There is a sign and a big plank, closing the road!" cried Tom,
presently. "And there is the bridge, just ahead."

Scarcely had he spoken when Dick shut off the engine entirely and
volplaned to the broad roadway and only a short distance from the
bridge. All looked around eagerly. Not a sign of a touring car could be
seen.

"Maybe they made a mistake----" commenced Sam, when Dick, who was
examining the ground, uttered a cry.

"Here are the tracks of the rubber tires!" exclaimed the eldest Rover
boy. "See, they pushed the plank aside and steered right for the
bridge!"

"But did they get over?" asked his brothers.

"I suppose so. Wait, I'll go over and see."

Lantern in hand, Dick crossed on the beams of the wooden bridge. On the
opposite side he saw the same tracks of the tires in the dust and dirt.

"Yes, they came over!" he shouted.

"But the planking----" came from Tom.

"They must have thrown it into place to cross and then taken it up
again, so that they couldn't be followed,--that is, in a carriage, or an
auto, or on horseback."

"Yes, but they can't stop a biplane!" cried Sam, eagerly. "And this must
have taken time to do! We must be close behind them!"

"Let's get right after 'em!" put in Tom, and all three ran once more for
the _Dartaway_, and soon the quick explosions of the motor sounded on
the night air.

If the boys had been excited before, they were more so now, for they
realized that the touring car at the best could be but a few miles away.
Could they catch up to it before those running the machine had a chance
to slip them in the darkness?

"They must have their lights lit," said Dick. "They'd not dare run
without them. Look and see if you can't spot their headlights. Their
taillight we smashed with a pistol shot."

On and on swept the biplane. As the late moon came up higher, the way
became brighter, until they could distinguish the road below quite
plainly. But nothing like a touring car came into view.

"They must have had more time than we thought, or else they ran mighty
fast," remarked Dick, after several miles had been covered.

Presently they saw two bright lights coming towards them, down on the
road. At once Dick shut off the power, and allowed the biplane to come
down in the centre of the highway. Then Tom waved the lantern, and at
the same time all three lads took hold of their pistols.

It was a runabout that was coming up, an old affair, carrying two men
that looked like farmers.

"Hello, what's this, a hold-up?" cried one of the men. "By gum! if it
ain't an airship!" he gasped, as his machine came to a standstill in
front of the _Dartaway_.

"We'd like some information," said Dick, stepping forward and holding up
the lantern. "We are looking for a big enclosed touring car that came
this way. Did you meet it on the road?"

"A tourin' car? No, we didn't meet any kind o' an auto."

"None at all?"

"Nary a one," answered the second man.

"May I ask how far you've come?" went on Dick.

"We came from Plankville."

"How far is that?"

"About six miles."

"Are there any side roads between here and Plankville?"

"Plenty of 'em, but none good enough fer a car. Them that ain't sand is
mud, an' deep mud, too. This is the only road in these parts fit for
autoing."

"You are sure that car didn't go through Plankville? It was a big
enclosed car, painted dark blue."

"I was sittin' on the hotel stoop fer an hour before we came along an'
there wasn't nary a car went through."

"Well, that car was on this road," said Tom. "It must have gone
somewhere."

"I don't see where it could go," said the second man, and shook his head
slowly. "All the side roads is terrible in these parts."

"Well, we are much obliged for the information," said Dick. "Wait, we'll
soon have our biplane out of the way." And then he and his brothers
wheeled it to one side, so the runabout could pass.

The men were curious to see the machine fly and remained while the boys
started up the engine.

"What are you going to do next?" whispered Sam.

"We'll take a look at the side roads," replied Dick. "Maybe the touring
car tried one of them and got stuck. I hope it did."

With a rush and a roar, the _Dartaway_ sped down the highway and then
arose in the air, and as it did this the men in the runabout gave a
cheer and clapped their hands. Then the Rover boys continued their hunt.

They kept close to the main road and did not fly any higher than was
necessary. Whenever they reached a side road Dick would make a circle,
coming back to the highway and going forward. Thus they kept on until
they came in sight of Plankville.

"Hark!" cried Sam, as a distant bell tolled out. "Ten o'clock!"

"Only ten o'clock!" murmured Tom. "It seems like a week since we left
Brill!"

"And we haven't had supper yet," went on the youngest Rover.

"Who wants any supper?" came from Dick. "I'm sure I don't."

"Not a mouthful, until we rescue Dora and Nellie," answered Tom.

"I'd like a drink--I'm as dry as a herring," said Sam.

"We'll look for water when we go down again," answered Dick.

Presently they descended once more, and, as a brook was handy, each
drank his fill. Then Dick turned back in the direction from which they
had come.

"Now what?" demanded Tom.

"I'm going to find out where they went, Tom. They didn't come this far,
I am sure of that."

"Why?"

"Because I can't find their tracks in the road. The tracks of the
runabout are there and that's all. They didn't come this far. They
stopped or branched off somewhere between here and that bridge the road
men are repairing."

"Why can't we search the road for tracks?" asked Sam.

"Just what I am going to do. We can go down every half mile or so and
look the ground over."

This was done three times, and twice they saw no tracks. Then they
located them once more, about half way between the bridge and
Plankville.

"Perhaps we had better follow them up on foot for awhile," suggested
Dick. "They aren't in the roadway half a mile from here."

"Well, there are no side roads nearby," returned Tom. "And no houses or
barns, either," he added, searching the moonlit landscape.

Lantern in hand, Dick led the way, the others following. Thus several
hundred feet were covered. Then all came to a halt and stared at each
other. The tracks of the touring car led from the roadway directly into
a big field, backed up by what looked to be a dense woods.

"We are getting closer!" cried Dick. "Now, to put the _Dartaway_ in a
safe place and then we'll follow them on foot!"




CHAPTER XXVII

THE CHAUFFEUR OF THE TOURING CAR


"Let us run the biplane down the road a way and then into another field
and down among the trees," suggested Tom. "No use of leaving it too near
here--some of that gang might come and ruin it."

Tom's advice was considered good, and once more the three Rover boys
hurried to the _Dartaway_. As there was still no wind, it was an easy
matter to roll the machine along on its wheels. They found a field where
the fence was down, and ran the biplane across this and in among some
trees and bushes.

"Are you going to take the lantern?" asked Sam. "It seems to me it won't
be wise to let them see us, at first."

"I'll take it along unlit," answered his big brother. "It may come in
handy later."

"Let us get some clubs," suggested Tom. "They may come in handier than
the pistols."

"Right you are!" cried Dick. "We don't want any shooting if it can be
avoided."

"Evidently you think they are close at hand," remarked Sam, while they
were cutting stout sticks from among the brushwood.

"They can't have gone so very far, in that dense woods," answered Tom.
"Why, the auto couldn't get through."

At last the boys were ready to continue the search, and stick and
lantern in hand, Dick led the way, with Tom and Sam close behind. They
had to bend close to the ground, to make sure that they were following
the tracks of the touring car.

The trail led among the trees onto what was evidently a road used for
hauling out timber. Following this for about a quarter of a mile, the
youths discovered a dark object, resting near what looked to be the end
of the road.

"It's the auto!" whispered Dick.

"Anybody around?" questioned Tom, in an equally low voice.

"I don't know. Be careful and we'll see."

With extreme caution the boys walked closer to the touring car and then
all around it. Nobody was at hand, and not a sound broke the silence of
the night.

"Deserted!" whispered Sam. "Where did they go to, I wonder?"

"Hush!" returned Dick. "They may be close enough to hear you."

With strained ears, the Rover boys listened for some sound that might
indicate the presence in that vicinity of those they were after. But
they heard nothing but the call of a night bird and the far-off hoot of
an owl.

"They have gone on," said Dick, at last. "We'll have to find the trail
and follow. Maybe I'll have to light the lantern."

"Say, let us fix the auto first--so they can't use it, if they come
back!" exclaimed Tom.

"A good idea, Tom," answered his big brother. And, as soon as Dick had
lighted the lantern, Tom and Sam set to work to render the touring car
unusable for the time being by turning off the flow of gasoline from the
tank and disconnecting the spark plugs.

"That will keep 'em guessing for a while, if they try to run it," was
Sam's comment.

In the meantime Dick was examining the ground, and soon he found the
mark of many footprints in the moss and leaves. They led along a
well-defined footpath running through the woods and up something of a
hill.

"They went this way," he said. "The fact is, I don't see how they could
go any other,--the brushwood is so thick."

"Maybe there's a house back there," suggested Tom.

"I shouldn't be surprised. That path must lead to somewhere."

The boys had just started to move along the footpath when from out of
the darkness came an unexpected hail:

"Hello, there! Who are you?"

The call came from ahead, and at a turn of the trail the lads saw, by
the dim rays of the lantern, the form of a man, wearing a fur coat and
an automobile cap.

"The driver of the car!" burst out Dick.

"I say, who are you?" called the man, coming to a halt. Evidently he was
coming back to take care of the automobile, or run it away.

"Hello, yourself!" answered Dick, boldly. "What are you doing here this
time of night?"

"Humph! Is that any of your business?" growled the man. He was evidently
a rough customer and not pleased at being thus surprised.

"I don't know; perhaps," answered Dick, drawing closer. "Don't let him
get away," he whispered to his brothers.

The boys made a rush forward, raising their sticks as they did so, and
before the man could think of retreating they had him surrounded.

"Say, look here, what does this mean?" demanded the fellow, trying to
put on a bold front, although he was much disturbed.

"You'll find out what it means before we are done with you," cried Tom,
hotly. "More than likely it means state's prison for you."

"State's prison!" The man shrank back. "Why--er--I haven't done anything
wrong."

"Oh, of course not!" returned Dick, sarcastically. "Abducting two young
ladies isn't wrong I suppose!"

"I didn't abduct anybody," growled the man. "Somebody hired my car,
that's all I know. Now the job is done, and I'm going about my
business."

"Not just yet," said Dick, quietly but firmly. "Tell me, what have they
done with the two young ladies?"

"That ain't my business," commenced the chauffeur, savagely. "You let me
go, or I'll----Oh!"

He stopped short and let out a yell of pain and fright. He had tried to
push Dick out of his path. The oldest Rover boy had dropped the lantern
and struck out fairly and squarely with his fist, and the blow had
landed on the man's jaw, nearly taking him from his feet.

"Now behave yourself and come along!" cried Dick, and caught the man by
the arm. "Don't let him escape!" he cried, to his brothers. "Use your
sticks, and your pistols, too, if it is necessary."

The boys closed in, and the sight of the sticks and the pistols
frightened the chauffeur greatly. He saw that he was trapped, and that
resistance might put him in a worse hole.

"I didn't do it!" he whined, as the boys hurried him back towards the
automobile. "I was hired for a certain job, that's all. The men said
they had a right to carry the young ladies off--that one of 'em was the
old man's stepdaughter, and that both of 'em had run away from a girls'
school and wouldn't learn their lessons."

"And you mean to tell me that you believe such stuff!" snorted Tom.

"Well, that's what they told me," answered the man doggedly. "They hired
the car first without telling me what sort of a job it was. Then they
told me they wouldn't give me a cent if I didn't do what I was told to
do. I'm a poor man, and----"

"You tell it well, but I don't believe a word of it," interrupted Dick.
"You have committed a serious crime, and the only way in which you can
help yourself at all is by helping us."

"Will you let me go if I help you?" demanded the chauffeur, eagerly.

"We'll see about that later," answered Dick, briefly. "For the present
we intend to keep you a prisoner."

"A prisoner! You haven't any right----"

"We'll take the right."

"That's the talk!" put in Tom.

By this time the party had reached the automobile. As Dick had surmised,
several straps and ropes lay in the box under the back seat, and with
these they bound the man's hands behind him. Once he started to resist,
but when Tom raised his shining pistol he wilted.

"Now you tell me where they took the young ladies," said Dick, after the
fellow had been strapped fast to his own automobile.

"They took 'em up to the house."

"What house?"

"The old mansion back there on the hill."

"Who was in the crowd?"

"The old man and the old lady, and the two young ladies, and the three
young men, and the doctor."

"The old lady!" cried Dick. "Who was she? What was her name?"

"I think they called her Sobber, same as one of the young fellows. They
had her along to look after the girls."

"It must be the one from Boston!" cried Sam. "Tad's aunt, or whatever
she is."

"Where did they pick her up?" asked Dick.

"Down at Fremville. She was waiting with one of the young men, a chap
they called Koswell."

"Are they all up at that old mansion now?"

"I suppose so. They were there when I left."

"Who lives at the place?"

"I don't know,--I didn't see anybody."




CHAPTER XXVIII

AT THE OLD MANSION


After that the chauffeur became more communicative, and in a few words
told how he had been engaged by Koswell and Larkspur to do a certain job
that they said might take the best part of the afternoon and night. They
had told him that a certain college professor at Brill had a wayward
stepdaughter and that the daughter and her school chum had grossly
insulted a lady teacher and were in danger of being arrested. The old
professor wanted to get the two girls away and place them under the care
of an old lady, a distant relative, who would know how to manage them.
He had been promised fifty dollars if he would do the work and say
nothing about it to anybody, he being informed that the old professor
wanted to avoid all publicity and also wished to shield his
stepdaughter.

"They told me first there were three girls," went on the man. "And so
there were, but one got away somehow, so then we took only the two."

"But you heard what the girls said, didn't you?" asked Dick, sharply.

"I was paying attention to running my car," mumbled the chauffeur.

"How about when I and my brother came after you on horseback? Why didn't
you stop and find out what we wanted?"

"The young fellow, Sobber, said you were from the school where the young
ladies attended and that maybe you wanted to arrest them. They made me
go on."

"That sounds pretty fishy to me," returned Dick. "Still, I won't condemn
you until this whole thing is cleared up. Just now we've got to find
those young ladies."

"Going to leave me tied up?" cried the chauffeur.

"Yes, until we get back."

"That aint fair nohow!"

"Well, fair or not, that's the way it is going to be," put in Tom. "My
own opinion is, you are almost as guilty as anybody. You didn't plan
this thing, but you were perfectly willing to do your share in carrying
it out."

The chauffeur begged and pleaded, but the three boys would not listen to
him. All were eager to go on, to ascertain what had become of Dora and
Nellie. They felt that the girls must be suffering intensely even though
Mrs. Sobber was with them.

"No use of taking the lantern, we can easily find the way," said Dick.
"I'd rather have the stick handy, and my pistol."

Leaving the chauffeur grumbling roundly, the three Rover boys hurried
along the woodland trail. It made half a dozen turns, the last around a
spring of pure cold water, which the tired-out lads could not resist.
Each got a good drink and felt much refreshed. All were too excited to
notice their hunger, even though they had not tasted a mouthful of food
since the noon lunch.

"I see the house!" whispered Sam, presently, and pointed ahead, and his
brothers nodded.

Set in a cleared space was an old stone mansion, two stories high, and
with several wings. The porch was badly rotted, the chimney top gone,
and the whole structure showed signs of decay. Around the place was what
had once been a well-kept flower garden, now overrun with a tangle of
dead flowers stalks and untrimmed rose bushes. Evidently no one had done
any work around the place for several years.

"Just the kind of a place those chaps would pick out," whispered Dick to
his brothers. "They never suspected anybody would trace 'em. I suppose
they found out the old mansion was not being used, and they either hired
it or took possession without asking."

"I begin to think this was all a well-laid plot," said Sam.

"Sure thing," muttered Tom. "The only trip-up they made was when they
didn't catch Grace as well as Nellie and Dora."

"And when old Crabtree dropped that visiting card," added Dick.

The boys saw that lights were burning in one of the lower rooms of the
old mansion and in two of the upper rooms.

"I guess they are all there," said Dick.

"Can't we get closer and make sure?" pleaded Tom.

"We don't want them to see us, Tom."

"Why not?"

"Because it might spoil everything. Remember they are four or five
strong, not counting the woman, and she would probably fight as hard as
anybody, if cornered."

"Five?" queried Sam.

"Yes, counting that fellow the girls took for a doctor."

"Oh, yes, I'd forgotten him. The machine certainly had a load coming to
the place."

"If the girls are there--and safe for the time being--I know what I'd
like to do," went on the big brother, after a pause.

"What?"

"Go to the nearest town and notify the authorities, and make that whole
crowd prisoners."

"That would be fine!" cried Tom. "But can we do it? They might try to
slip away."

"That is true, although I doubt it. I think their plan is, now they are
here, to lay low. They'll think they are perfectly safe here. Most
likely they'll send some kind of a letter to dad, and to Mrs Stanhope
and Mrs. Laning, asking for money, and then they'll wait for answers.
They'll want us to pay a big sum for the release of Dora and Nellie."

"If only we could capture them ourselves!" murmured Tom, his eyes
glistening. "Don't you think we can do it, with the sticks and pistols?"

"We might, Tom,--but it would be a big risk. Those fellows are
desperate, Sobber especially, and they must be armed, too. There is no
use of our getting shot if it can be avoided."

With extreme caution the three boys walked around the old mansion. In
one of the upper rooms, the curtains of which had been drawn, they could
make out several forms moving about.

"There, I think that was Nellie!" cried Tom, as a shadow appeared on the
curtain.

"And there is that woman!" added Sam, as another form appeared and
vanished.

"I'd like to know if Dora is there," murmured Dick.

They waited for a minute and saw several shadows pass and repass the
curtain. They were sure Nellie was there but were not so certain about
her cousin. The woman was Mrs. Sobber beyond a doubt.

"If they leave the girls in that room and alone--with that window
unlocked----" began Dick.

"The woman may stay with them," interrupted Tom.

"Get back--somebody is coming!" whispered Sam, and dragged his brothers
down, behind some rose bushes.

Two persons were coming out of the old mansion. One carried a lantern
and what looked to be some bed slats and the other a ladder. They were
Tad Sobber and Jerry Koswell.

"Do you think the ladder is long enough?" they heard Koswell ask.

"I guess so--I'll soon see," answered Tad Sobber.

The pair walked around to the side of the house and the ladder was
placed in position under the window of the room the boys had been
watching. Then Sobber went up with the slats, and some nails and a
hammer, and commenced to nail the slats across the window.

"He's going to make a regular prison cell of the room!" whispered Tom.
"Oh, if only I dared to run in and yank that ladder from under him!" he
added, with grim humor.

"Hush, or they'll hear you," warned Dick. "I am glad to see this," he
went on, in a low whisper. "It shows that they think they haven't been
followed and are safe. Now to get to the nearest town, notify the
authorities, and bag the bunch of them!"

"If we could only get some word to the girls," murmured Tom.

"Yes, Tom, that would be very nice. But we can't afford to take the
chance. If some of those rascals get away, sooner or later they'll make
more trouble for us."

"I know that."

"I think one of us might remain here on guard, while the others go to
town for help."

"How are you going to get to town?"

"I've got a plan for that," and Dick smiled faintly. "I'll make our
friend, the chauffeur, do us a good turn."

"What, will you go in that touring car?" cried Sam.

"Why not? It's a big, roomy car, and can carry a lot of officers of the
law. And we know it can make speed."

"All right, Dick, go ahead. I guess you know the right thing to do."

After a few words, it was decided that Tom should remain on guard while
Dick and Sam went for assistance. Dick cautioned Tom not to show
himself.

"If you do, you may spoil everything," said he.

"All right, I'll lay low," answered Tom, "that is, unless I find out
that the girls actually need me," he added. "I won't stand it if that
old woman, or Crabtree, illtreats them."

"No, if they try that, sail in and do what you can to save them," said
Dick.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE ARM OF THE LAW


Soon Dick and Sam were on the way to where they had left the chauffeur
and the big touring car. They fairly ran down the woodland trail,
stumbling over the rocks and tree roots in the darkness. Once Sam went
down, and scratched his hand, but he got up without complaining.

They were almost in sight of the machine when they heard a peculiar
sound. Dick's heart gave a bound.

"Listen!" he cried. "He's trying to crank up! He must have gotten free
of his bonds!"

The oldest Rover boy was right, the chauffeur had worked at the straps
and ropes until he had liberated himself. Now he was working at the
crank of the touring car, hoping to get away in the machine.

"He won't get started," muttered Sam, remembering what he and Tom had
done to the automobile.

They sneaked up behind the man, and before he could resist had thrown
him flat on his back. Then, while Dick held him down, Sam ran and got
the straps and ropes.

"You let me go!" yelled the man. "Let me go, or it will be the worse for
you!" And he tried to get away. But then Dick put a pistol to his head
and he collapsed and offered no more resistance.

As soon as the chauffeur was again secured, the boys bundled him into
the enclosed portion of the car and tied him fast to the foot rail and
the robe rail. Then the youths lost no time in readjusting the machine
so it could be used, and lighting all the front lamps.

"If they hear us they'll think it is the chauffeur going away," said
Dick.

"Can you run her, Dick?" asked his brother.

"I think so. It seems to be a good deal like our car at home, only
larger."

It was agreed that Sam should get into the coach part and watch the
prisoner while Dick ran the car. Then Dick started up the machine,
backed out and turned around, and then made his way out of the woods and
across the field to the highway. At first he ran cautiously, but as soon
as he became accustomed to the car he turned on the speed and spun along
at the rate of thirty miles an hour in the direction of Plankville.

"How is she going?" asked Sam, from behind.

"Fine! How is that prisoner?"

"As mad as a hornet," and there was a chuckle in Sam's tone.

It was not long before they came in sight of Plankville, and Dick slowed
down a little. He ran directly up to the hotel, where several men were
on the point of separating for the night.

"I want to get some officers of the law," he cried. "Where can I find
them?"

"Well, you've got one of 'em right here," answered one of the men,
stepping forward. "What do you want?"

"Who are you?"

"I am Jackson Fells, and I happen to be sheriff of this county."

"The sheriff!" burst out Dick. "Just the man I'd like to meet. Sheriff,
I've got a prisoner for you, and I want you to raise a posse as quickly
as you can and round up five or six other persons."

"Eh, what? A prisoner?" cried the sheriff. "Where is he?"

"Tied up good and tight inside the car. Tell me where to take him, will
you?"

"Hum! Well, I guess you better take him over to my office first and
we'll look into this," said the sheriff. "It's right around the corner.
I was just going home."

The county official got into the car and the other men followed on foot,
anxious to see what was going on. In less than a minute they reached the
sheriff's office and several lamps were lit and the chauffeur was
brought in.

It took quite some time for Dick and Sam to make themselves clear and
get Sheriff Fells to move. The driver of the big touring car was
questioned, and then placed in charge of the keeper of the lock-up.

"Maybe you'll get off easy, if you turn state's evidence," said one of
the men present. "You'd better do it, too, for this is a serious case."

"I'm willing to tell all I know," growled the prisoner. "I was led into
this before I knew what was going on."

"We're going to use the car to round up the others," added Dick.

"Go ahead, I don't care. It don't belong to me anyway--I hired it from
my boss."

"Then we'll settle with your boss," said Sam.

One of the men present was a constable and another a special policeman,
and both said they would go along with the sheriff and the boys. The
posse went well armed, for Dick had warned them that some of the
rascals to be rounded up were desperate characters.

"We don't want any of them to get away," said the oldest Rover boy. "We
want to make each one a prisoner."

"Don't you worry, young man, they won't get away from me," answered the
sheriff. "I used to be on the New York force before I moved out here,
and I know that class of scoundrels. I know that old stone house, and
when we get there we'll fix a plan to bag every one of 'em."

All were soon in the touring car, and once more Dick put on the speed.
They ran so fast it made the constable chuckle.

"Gee whizz!" he murmured. "We're exceedin' the speed limit, Sheriff!
Don't you think I'd better hop out an' arrest the bunch?"

"'Necessity knows no law,'" quoted the county official. "Just the same,
young man, don't you land us head up in a ditch!" he added, to Dick.

The boys were on the watch, and presently saw the field from which they
had come and steered into it. Then they ran into the woods and brought
the car to a standstill just where it had been before.

"Now, I think you had better be as quiet as possible," said Dick.

"Right you are," returned the sheriff, and gave orders to his men to
that effect.

As silently as so many ghosts the posse and Dick and Sam hurried along
the woodland trail in the direction of the old stone mansion. Soon they
came in sight of the place. As they did so Tom came to meet them.

"Anything new?" questioned Dick, in a whisper.

"The men folks are in the sitting room of the place," answered Tom.

"In the sitting room? As late as this? Wouldn't you think they'd
retire," said Sam.

"They are quarrelling," went on Tom, and now he was chuckling.

"Quarrelling? Over what?"

"Over the way they are going to divide the money they squeeze out of dad
and Mrs. Stanhope and Mrs. Laning. They've got it all cut and dried that
they are going to get forty or fifty thousand dollars before they send
Nellie and Dora back to school, and Crabtree and Sobber want the lion's
share, while Koswell and Larkspur and that other chap, the doctor,--if
he is one--want just as much. They are at it hot and heavy."

"What of the girls?"

"They must still be in the upper room, and the woman is either with
them or next door to them."

Tom was glad to see the sheriff and his men, and in a very few words the
county official outlined his plan for capturing the evildoers in the old
stone mansion.

"We'll let them believe that I brought about a dozen men with me," said
Sheriff Fells. "That will most likely take the starch right out of them.
Then, before they can think of resisting, I'll clap the irons on them.
You, Thompson, can stay out in front, and you, Rapp, can walk around to
the rear. If they run, plug them in the legs," added the sheriff grimly.
It had been a long time since he had had such an important case to deal
with and he intended to make the best showing possible.

"We can go in with you, can't we?" asked Dick.

"Certainly, and don't hesitate to show your guns, boys. But don't use
them unless they show fight and try to get away."

"They are not going to get away!" cried Tom, sturdily. "This is the time
we are going to round 'em up, every one!"

A few further directions were given by the sheriff, and then he and the
three Rover boys advanced to the front door of the old mansion. At the
same time, with pistol in hand, the officer named Thompson remained
where he was, while he named Rapp walked around to guard the rear.

The door was unlocked, for those inside had not dreamed of being
disturbed. On tiptoes the party entered the dark hallway. To keep out
the cold, the door to the sitting room had been closed. From within the
room came a murmur of voices.

"Well then, that's settled," came from Tad Sobber.

"I think we ought to have more money," grumbled Koswell.

"You will be getting your full share," said Josiah Crabtree, tartly.

"And you'll be getting what is coming to you in another minute!"
chuckled Tom.

Advancing to the door the sheriff paused for a moment and then threw it
wide open, at the same time holding up a brace of pistols.

"Hands up!" he cried sternly. "Hands up, all of you, in the name of the
law!"




CHAPTER XXX

THE ROUND-UP--CONCLUSION


"What's this?"

"It's the Rovers!"

"Who is this man--an officer?"

"We are caught!"

"Let me get out of here!"

These and various other exclamations rent the air, when those in the
sitting room of the mansion beheld the sheriff of the county and the
three Rover boys standing at the doorway, each armed. All leaped to
their feet and every one present tried to get out of range of the
sheriff's pistols.

"The game is up, gentlemen," went on Sheriff Fells. "The best thing you
can do is to submit quietly. I've got fifteen men outside to take care
of you."

"Caught!" burst out Bart Larkspur hoarsely, and sank on a chair all but
overcome. "Oh, why did I go into this scheme!"

"The--there is--er--some mistake!" stammered Josiah Crabtree, whose
face had gone the color of white chalk.

"Yes, a big mistake, Crabtree--and you and the others are going to pay
for it," answered Dick.

"I'll not submit!" yelled Tad Sobber, and sneaking up behind Koswell he
sent that individual flying into the sheriff. Then he leaped towards one
of the windows. At the same moment Crabtree leaped for another window.

But the Rover boys were too quick for them, and while the sheriff
continued to cover Koswell and the so-called doctor, and also kept an
eye on Larkspur, the lads leaped on their old enemies. With a rapid
swing of his right hand, Tom gave Sobber a blow on the jaw that sent him
staggering against the wall. At the same time Dick attacked Josiah
Crabtree.

"That for abducting Dora Stanhope and her mother!" he exclaimed, and his
fist landed on Crabtree's nose with such force that the former teacher
was sent spinning across the room. He let out a yell of agony, and
another yell when Dick hit him in the left eye.

"Don't! don't! I beg of you Rover!" he whined.

While this was going on, Koswell tried to dodge behind Larkspur and go
out by a side door. But Sam put out his foot and tripped the rascal up,
and then sat on him.

The noise downstairs reached the ears of those above, and in a few
seconds Mrs. Sobber appeared at the head of the stairs, with a lighted
candle.

"What is going on down there?" she asked.

"Madam, you keep where you are!" shouted the sheriff. "This house is
surrounded by officers of the law. Don't you dare to come down."

"Oh dear me!" shrieked the woman.

"Sam, go up and see if the girls are safe!" cried Dick. "We can take
care of things down here. Don't let that woman get away."

"I'll take care of that woman, never fear!" answered the youngest Rover.

The sheriff had brought along all the handcuffs necessary, and in a few
seconds he had handcuffed Koswell. He threw a pair of the steel
bracelets to Dick and another pair to Tom, and the Rovers had the
satisfaction of handcuffing Josiah Crabtree and Tad Sobber. Then the
sheriff made prisoners of the rest of the crowd, and called in the two
men from the outside, at the same time shouting loudly: "You other
fellows remain where you are!" as if the force of a dozen or more were
still there.

"Can we go upstairs now?" asked Dick.

"Sure you can," said the sheriff, with a little grin. "But I'll have to
go along--to get the evidence, you know."

Up the stairs bounded Dick and Tom. They found Mrs. Sobber in a corner
of the hallway, the lighted candle on a dusty stand. At a nearby door
Sam was inserting a key in the lock.

"Just got the key from the woman," he explained. "Can we come in?" he
called out.

"Yes! yes!" came eagerly from Dora and Nellie.

The youngest Rover opened the door, and like a flash Dick and Tom sped
past him and into the room. Dora and Nellie rushed to meet them,
laughing and crying hysterically.

"Oh, Dick! Dick!" burst out poor Dora, and then sank into his arms, too
weak to stand.

"Dora!" he murmured. "Oh, this is awful! Well, it shall never happen
again, never!" And he pressed her to him.

"Oh, Tom, how glad I am that you came!" said Nellie as she clung to him.

"They didn't hurt you, did they?" demanded Dick.

"They carried us off--that was enough," answered Dora. "Oh, Sam, what of
Grace?"

"It was Grace who told us," answered the youngest Rover. "She got away
from them, you know."

"We hoped so, but we weren't sure. They wouldn't tell us about her,"
said Nellie. "Are you alone?"

"No, indeed; we have the sheriff and his posse with us. Every one of the
rascals is under arrest."

"Good! It is what they deserve!"

"Have you got Mr. Crabtree?" faltered Dora.

"Yes," returned Dick. "And this time we'll take care that he is put
where he will never bother you and your mother again," he continued.

Although told to do so by Mrs. Sobber, the girls had refused to go to
bed and were fully dressed. They had been offered supper by the woman
but had found it impossible to eat.

"Well, we haven't had a mouthful ourselves," said Sam.

"But we are going to have the finest kind of a spread just as soon as we
get to town and those rascals are locked up," added Tom.

"But how did you manage to follow us so quickly?" asked Dora,
wonderingly.

"We came to Hope to call on you in the _Dartaway_," Dick explained. "And
we followed most of the way by biplane."

"Then you have the flying machine here?"

"Yes, although we didn't bring it very close to the house."

"What are you going to do with me?" cried Mrs. Sobber. "Oh, please do
not send me to prison! Tad made me do it!"

"This case is now in the hands of the law," answered Dick, coldly. Then
the sheriff, who had said nothing, came forward and handcuffed the woman
and marched her downstairs.

When the Rovers and the girls went below they found that all of the
prisoners had been marched outside. The sheriff was anxious to get them
to the jail and the boys did not blame him.

"I don't see how that auto is going to hold all of us," said the county
official. "Reckon we'll be kind of crowded."

"Oh, I'd hate to ride with those bad men!" murmured Dora. "I'd rather
walk!"

"So would I," added Nellie.

"It's too far to walk," answered Dick. "But I'll tell you what you might
do, if you are willing to risk it. You might sail to town in the
_Dartaway_."

"Dick if you do it, so will I," cried Dora.

"You won't be afraid?" he asked, anxiously.

"Why should I be?" she murmured. "If anything happened to you, why
I--I'd just as soon have it happen to me, too!"

"I'll go, if Tom goes," put in Nellie. "I don't want to go anywhere near
those horrid men."

"Someone will have to run the touring car," said Dick.

"I can do that,--if you will look after the girls," answered Sam,
promptly; and so it was finally arranged. A few minutes later the
prisoners were marched off by the sheriff and his men and Sam. Dick and
Tom, and the two girls, went ahead, to walk to where the biplane had
been left among the trees.

The girls were a little frightened at first, but did their best not to
show it. Dora sat as close to Dick as she could, and Tom held Nellie in
a seat in front of him. Up into the air rushed the _Dartaway_ and both
girls gave a little gasp. Dick did not sail high, nor did he put on much
speed, since there was no need.

"I see something in the road!" cried Tom, after they had been sailing
along for several minutes. "It's the auto, with the sheriff's crowd, and
the prisoners!" And then Dick swept down close to the turnout and Sam
gave three blasts on the horn, to let them know he saw them. Then the
biplane and the touring car continued on the way to Plankville.

News of the intended arrest had been circulated, and a crowd was in
waiting at the sheriff's office when they arrived. As it was past
midnight, the hearing was a brief one, and soon the prisoners were
placed behind the bars, to await the further action of the law. Then the
Rovers and the girls were told they could go where they pleased so long
as they agreed to appear when wanted.

"We'll appear all right enough!" cried Tom. "Why, Mr. Sheriff, you
couldn't beat us away with a club! We intend to see to it that every one
of those rascals gets what is coming to him!"

"I reckon you've got a good enough case," answered the county official,
grimly.

The hotel keeper had been at the hearing and he readily offered to give
the girls a room next to that occupied by himself and his wife, and give
the boys rooms also. And he likewise agreed to get the party a
substantial midnight supper.

"But we must send word to the folks first," said Dora.

"Yes," answered Dick. And this was soon done, although they had to get a
telegraph operator out of bed to do it. But as the man was well paid for
his trouble, he did not mind this.

"And now to get back to Hope and to Brill!" cried Tom, the following
morning, when the boys and girls were dining again. "How shall we go?"

"We've got to get the _Dartaway_ back," said Sam. "I can do that, if you
folks want to go by train, trolley and stage."

"It's a long-winded trip that way," answered Tom. "We'd have to make
five changes. I asked the sheriff about it."

"Do you boys want us to go in the biplane?" asked Nellie.

"Would you go?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"I will if Dora will."

"I'll go if Dick wishes it," said Dora, with a fond glance at the youth
who was some day to be her husband.

So it was settled that all should travel in the flying machine, and the
boys at once set to work to go over the biplane carefully. The start was
made an hour later, the sheriff and the hotel keeper and his wife waving
them a farewell. Sam ran the biplane, and, as was to be expected, Dora
sat close to Dick and Nellie close to Tom. There was no wind, only clear
sunshine, and after a little nervousness, the girls began to enjoy the
trip. Not a stop was made, all being too anxious to get to Hope.

Grace was on the watch for their return, and as the biplane came down
she ran to greet them, and there was a great jollification, the girls
laughing and crying by turns. The students and teachers crowded around,
wanting to know the particulars of what had happened. A little later
Songbird and Stanley appeared, having driven over from Brill to learn
if any word had been received from the Rovers.

"Glad you caught those rascals," was Songbird's comment. "And I hope
they send 'em all to prison for life!"

"They'll be sure to get pretty long terms," answered Sam.

Everybody has his or her story to tell, and that day there were but few
lessons both at Hope and at Brill. The Rovers were the heroes of the
occasion, and everybody wanted to congratulate them on what they had
done.

"Well, it was a pretty strenuous experience," said Dick to his friends.
He did not realize that still more strenuous happenings were in store
for him and his brothers. What they were, will be told in another
volume, to be entitled, "The Rover Boys in New York; Or, Saving Their
Father's Honor."

All of the girls had been too upset by what had happened to go on with
their studies, and it was thought best to let them go home for awhile
and take it easy. The boys, too, went home, to let their folks know all
the details of the happening.

"You did very well, boys!" cried their father, when he greeted them.
"Very well indeed! I am proud of you!"

"And the best of it is, all of those rascals are now where they can
bother us no longer," added Randolph Rover.

Then the boys wanted to know about their parent's health and his
business prospects.

"I am feeling quite some better," said Mr. Rover. "And I think that
before a great while all those business complications will be
straightened out."

"That's fine, dad!" cried Tom, and threw his cap in the air. "Hurrah! We
come out ahead every time, don't we?" And then he did a jig, he felt so
happy.

"Let's go for a sail in the _Dartaway_!" came from Sam. "We'll call on
Peter Marley and the rest of those folks and let them know how we
rounded up Crabtree, Sobber & Company."

"That's the talk!" exclaimed Dick. "A sail will just suit me!"

And then off rushed the three Rover boys for an outing in their biplane.
And here we will leave them, wishing them all the good times possible.


THE END




THE FAMOUS ROVER BOYS SERIES

By ARTHUR W. WINFIELD


Each volume is hailed with delight by boys and girls everywhere. 12mo.
Cloth. Handsomely printed and illustrated.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.

THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
  Or, The Struggle for the Stanhope Fortune.
    Old enemies try again to injure our friends.

THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
  Or, The Right Road and the Wrong
    Brimming over with good nature and excitement.

THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
  Or, The Strange Cruise of the Steam Yacht
    A search for treasure; a particularly fascinating volume.

THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
  Or, The Last Days at Putnam Hall
    The boys find a mysterious cave used by freight thieves.

THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
  Or, The Deserted Steam Yacht
    A trip to the coast of Florida.

THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
  Or, The Mystery of Red Rock Ranch
    Relates adventures on the mighty Mississippi River.

THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
  Or, The Search for the Missing Houseboat
    The Ohio River is the theme of this spirited story.

THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
  Or, The Rivals of Pine Island
    At the annual school encampment.

THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
  Or, The Crusoes of Seven Islands
    Full of strange and surprising adventures.

THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
  Or, A Hunt for Fame and Fortune
    The boys in the Adirondacks at a Winter camp.

THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
  Or, The Secret of the Island Cave
    A story of a remarkable Summer outing; full of fun.

THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
  Or, The Search for a Lost Mine
    A graphic description of the mines of the great Rockies.

THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
  Or, Stirring Adventures in Africa
    The boys journey to the Dark Continent in search of their father.

THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
  Or, A Chase for a Fortune
    From school to the Atlantic Ocean.

THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
  Or, The Cadets of Putnam Hall
    The doings of Dick, Tom, and Sam Rover.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP--NEW YORK




THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES

COMPANION STORIES TO THE FAMOUS ROVER BOYS SERIES

By ARTHUR M. WINFIELD


Open-air pastimes have always been popular with boys, and should always
be encouraged, as they provide healthy recreation both for the body and
the mind. These books mingle adventure and fact, and will appeal to
every manly boy.

12mo. Handsomely printed and illustrated.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME, POSTPAID.


THE PUTNAM HALL ENCAMPMENT
  Or, The Secret of the Old Mill

A story full of vim and vigor, telling what the cadets did during the
summer encampment. * * * and among other things their visit to a
mysterious old mill, said to be haunted. The book has a wealth of
healthy fun in it.


THE PUTNAM HALL REBELLION
  Or, The Rival Runaways

The boys had good reasons for running away during Captain Putnam's
absence. They had plenty of fun, and several queer adventures.


THE PUTNAM HALL CHAMPIONS
  Or, Bound to Win Out

In this new tale the Putnam Hall Cadets show what they can do in various
keen rivalries on the athletic field and elsewhere. There is one victory
which leads to a most unlooked-for discovery.


THE PUTNAM HALL CADETS
  Or, Good Times in School and Out

The cadets are lively, flesh-and-blood fellows, bound to make friends
from the start. There are some keen rivalries, in school and out, and
something is told of a remarkable midnight feast and a hazing that had
an unlooked for ending.


THE PUTNAM HALL RIVALS
  Or, Fun and Sport Afloat and Ashore

It is a lively, rattling, breezy story of school life in this country,
written by one who knows all about its ways, its snowball fights, its
baseball matches, its pleasures and its perplexities, its glorious
excitements, its rivalries, and its chilling disappointments.

OTHER VOLUMES IN PREPARATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP--NEW YORK




THE RISE IN LIFE SERIES

BY HORATIO ALGER, JR.


These are Copyrighted Stories which cannot be obtained elsewhere. They
are the stories last written by this famous author.

12mo. Handsomely printed and illustrated. Bound in cloth Stamped in
colored inks.

PRICE, 40 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


THE YOUNG BOOK AGENT
  Or, Frank Hardy's Road to Success

A plain but uncommonly interesting tale of everyday life, describing the
ups and downs of a boy book-agent.


FROM FARM TO FORTUNE: Or, Nat Nason's Strange
Experience

Nat was a poor country lad. Work on the farm was hard, and after a
quarrel with his uncle, with whom he resided, he struck out for himself.


OUT FOR BUSINESS: Or, Robert Frog's Strange Career

Relates the adventures of a country boy who is compelled to leave home
and seek his fortune in the great world at large. How he wins success we
must leave to the reader to discover.


FALLING IN WITH FORTUNE
 Or, The Experiences of a Young Secretary

This is a companion tale to "Out for Business," but complete in itself,
and tells of the further doings of Robert Frost as private secretary.


YOUNG CAPTAIN JACK: Or, The Son of a Soldier

The scene is laid in the South during the Civil War, and the hero is a
waif who was cast up by the sea and adopted by a rich Southern planter.


NELSON THE NEWSBOY: Or, Afloat in New York

Mr. Alger is always at his best in the portrayal of life in New York
City, and this story is among the best he has given our young readers.


LOST AT SEA: Or, Robert Roscoe's Strange Cruise

A sea story of uncommon interest. The hero falls in with a strange
derelict--a ship given over to the wild animals of a menagerie.

JERKY, THE BACKWOODS BOY
 Or, The Parkhurst Treasure

Depicts life on a farm of New York State. The mystery of the treasure
will fascinate every boy. Jerry is a character well worth knowing.

RANDY OF THE RIVER
 Or, The Adventures of a Young Deckhand

Life on a river steamboat is not so romantic as some young people may
imagine. There is hard work, and plenty of it, and the remuneration is
not of the best. Bat Randy Thompson wanted work and took what was
offered. His success in the end was well deserved, and perhaps the
lesson his doings teach will not be lost upon those who peruse these
pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




THE FLAG OF FREEDOM SERIES

By CAPTAIN RALPH BONEHILL.


A favorite Line of American Stories for American Boys. Every volume
complete in itself, and handsomely illustrated. 12mo. Bound in cloth,
Stamped in Colors.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


WITH CUSTER IN THE BLACK HILLS
  Or, A Young Scout among the Indians.

Tells of the remarkable experiences of a youth who, with his parents,
goes to the Black Hills in search of gold. Custer's last battle is well
described. A volume every lad fond of Indian stories should possess.


BOYS OF THE FORT
  Or, A Young Captain's Pluck.

This story of stirring doings at one of our well-known forts in the Wild
West is of more than ordinary interest. The young captain had a
difficult task to accomplish, but he had been drilled to do his duty,
and does it thoroughly. Gives a good insight into army life of to-day.


THE YOUNG BANDMASTER
  Or, Concert, Stage, and Battlefield.

The hero is a youth with a passion for music, who becomes a cornetist in
an orchestra, and works his way up to the leadership of a brass band. He
is carried off to sea and falls in with a secret service cutter bound
for Cuba, and while there joins a military band which accompanies our
soldiers in the never-to-be-forgotten attack on Santiago.


OFF FOR HAWAII
  Or, The Mystery of a Great Volcano.

Here we have fact and romance cleverly interwoven. Several boys start on
a tour of the Hawaiian Islands. They have heard that there is a treasure
located in the vicinity of Kilauea, the largest active volcano in the
world, and go in search of it. Their numerous adventures will be
followed with much interest.


A SAILOR BOY WITH DEWEY
  Or, Afloat in the Philippines.

The story of Dewey's victory in Manila Bay will never grow old, but here
we have it told in a new form--as it appeared to a real, live American
youth who was in the navy at the time. Many adventures in Manila and in
the interior follow, give true-to-life scenes from this portion of the
globe.


WHEN SANTIAGO FELL
  Or, the War Adventures of Two Chums.

Two boys, an American and his Cuban chum, leave New York to join their
parents in the interior of Cuba. The war between Spain and the Cubans is
on, and the boys are detained at Santiago, but escape by crossing the
bay at night. Many adventures between the lines follow, and a good
pen-picture of General Garcia is given.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




The Frontier Series

Stories of Early American Exploration and Adventure for Boys.

By CAPTAIN RALPH BONEHILL


The Historical Background Is Absolutely Correct.

12 mo. Well printed and well illustrated. Handsomely bound in cloth,
stamped in Colors.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


PIONEER BOYS OF THE GOLD FIELDS
  Or, The Nugget Hunters of '49

A tale complete in itself, giving the particulars of the great rush of
the gold seekers to California in 1849. In the party making its way
across the continent are three boys, one from the country, another from
the city, and a third just home from a long voyage on a whaling ship.
They become chums, and share in no end of adventures.


PIONEER BOYS OF THE GREAT NORTHWEST
  Or, With Lewis and Clark Across the Rockies

A splendid story describing in detail the great expedition formed under
the leadership of Lewis and Clark, and telling what was done by the
pioneer boys who were first to penetrate the wilderness of the northwest
and push over the Rocky Mountains. The book possesses a permanent
historical value and the story should be known by every bright American
boy.


WITH BOONE ON THE FRONTIER
  Or, The Pioneer Boys of Old Kentucky

Relates the true-to-life adventures of two boys who, in company with
their folks, move westward with Daniel Boone. Contains many thrilling
scenes among the Indians and encounters with wild animals. It is
excellently told.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




THE GREAT NEWSPAPER SERIES

BY HOWARD R. GARIS

The author is a practised journalist, and these stories convey a true
picture of the workings of a great newspaper.

12mo. Well printed and finely illustrated.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.

FROM OFFICE BOY TO REPORTER
  Or, The First Step in Journalism

LARRY DEXTER, REPORTER
  Or, Strange Adventures in a Great City

LARRY DEXTER'S GREAT SEARCH
  Or, The Hunt for a Missing Millionaire

       *       *       *       *       *


The Deep Sea Series BY ROY ROCKWOOD

No manly boy ever grew tired of sea stories--there is a fascination
about them, and they are a recreation to the mind.

12mo. Handsomely printed and illustrated.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.

ADRIFT ON THE PACIFIC
  Or, The Secret of the Island Cave

THE CRUISE OF THE TREASURE SHIP
  Or, The Castaways of Floating Island

THE RIVAL OCEAN DIVERS
  Or, The Search for a Sunken Treasure

       *       *       *       *       *


The Railroad Series By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Ralph is determined to be a "railroad man." He starts in at the foot of
the ladder; but is full of manly pluck and "wins out." Boys will be
greatly interested in his career.

12mo. Handsomely printed and illustrated.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


RALPH ON THE OVERLAND EXPRESS
  Or, the Trials and Triumphs of a Young Engineer

A clean cut picture of railroading of to-day.

RALPH OF THE ROUND HOUSE
  Or, Bound to Become a Railroad Man

RALPH IN THE SWITCH TOWER
  Or, Clearing the Track

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP--NEW YORK




The Enterprise Books

Captivating Stories for Boys by Justly Popular Writers


The episodes are graphic, exciting, realistic--the tendency of the tales
is to the formation of an honorable and manly character. They are
unusually interesting, and convey lessons of pluck, perseverance and
manly independence.

12mo. Handsomely illustrated. Printed on excellent paper, and
attractively bound in colored cloth, stamped in Colors.

PRICE, 40 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


MOFFAT, WILLIAM D.
    THE CRIMSON BANNER.
     A Story of College Baseball

Books have been written about college baseball, but it remained for Mr.
Moffat, a Princeton man, to come forward with a tale that grips one from
start to finish. The students are almost flesh and blood, and the
contests become real as we read about them. The best all-around college
and baseball tale yet presented.


GRAYDON, WILLIAM MURRAY
    CANOE BOYS AND CAMP FIRES.
     Or, Adventures in Winding Waters

Where is there a youth who does not love a gun, a fishing rod, a canoe,
or a roaring camp-fire? In this book we have the doings of several
bright and lively boys, who go on a canoeing trip on a winding stream,
and meet with many exciting happenings. The breath of the forest blows
through this tale, and every boy who reads it will be sorry that he was
not a member of the canoe club that took that never-to-be-forgotten
outing.


HARKNESS, PETER T.
    ANDY, THE ACROBAT.
     Or, With the Greatest Show on Earth

Andy is as bright as a silver dollar. In the book we can smell the
sawdust, hear the flapping of the big white canvas and the roaring of
the lions, and listen to the merry "hoop la!" of the clown.


FOSTER, W. BERT
    THE QUEST OF THE SILVER SWAN.
     A Tale of Ocean Adventure

A Youth's story of the deep blue sea--of the search for a derelict
carrying a fortune. Brandon Tarr is a manly lad, and all lads will be
eager to learn whether he failed or succeeded in his mission.


GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




The Enterprise Books--(Continued)

PRICE, 40 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


WHITE, MATTHEW, JR.
    TWO BOYS AND A FORTUNE.
     Or, The Tyler Will

If you had been poor and were suddenly left a half-million dollars, what
would you do with it? Do you think the money would bring you happiness,
or would it bring only increased cares? That was the problem that
confronted the Pell family, and especially the twin brothers, Rex and
Roy. A strong, helpful story that should be read by every boy and every
young man in our land.


WINFIELD, ARTHUR M.
    BOB, THE PHOTOGRAPHER.
     Or, A Hero in Spite of Himself

Relates the experiences of a poor boy who falls in with a "camera
fiend," and develops a liking for photography. After a number of
stirring adventures Bob becomes photographer for a railroad, and while
taking pictures along the line thwarts the plan of those who would
injure the railroad corporation and incidentally clears a mystery
surrounding his parentage.


ROCKWOOD, ROY
    JACK NORTH'S TREASURE HUNT.
     A Story of South American Adventure

Jack is sent to South America on a business trip, and while there he
hears of the wonderful treasure of the Incas located in the Andes. He
learns also of a lake that appears and disappears. He resolves to
investigate, and organizes an expedition for that purpose. The book is a
thriller.


BONEHILL, CAPTAIN RALPH
    LOST IN THE LAND OF ICE.
     Or, Daring Adventures Round the South Pole

An expedition is fitted out by a rich young man who loves the ocean, and
with him goes the hero of the tale, a lad who has some knowledge of a
treasure ship said to be cast away in the land of ice. On the way the
expedition is stopped by enemies, and the heroes land among the wild
Indians of Patagonia. When the ship approaches the South Pole it is
caught in a huge iceberg, and several of those on board become truly
lost in the land of ice.


GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




The Dorothy Chester Series

By EVELYN RAYMOND


A series of stories for American girls, by one of the most popular
writers of fiction for girls' reading. The books are full of interest,
winsome and thoroughly wholesome.

12mo. Handsomely printed on excellent paper, and finely illustrated.
Handsomely bound in cloth, stamped in Colors.

PRICE, 60 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


DOROTHY CHESTER
 The Haps and Mishaps of a Foundling

The first volume tells how Dorothy was found on the doorstep, taken in,
and how she grew to be a lovable girl of twelve; and was then carried
off by a person who held her for ransom. She made a warm friend of Jim,
the nobody; and the adventures of the pair are as interesting as they
are surprising.


DOROTHY CHESTER AT SKYRIE

Shows Dorothy at her country home near the Highlands of the Hudson. Here
astonishing adventures befell her, and once again Jim, the nobody, comes
to her assistance.

OTHER VOLUMES IN PREPARATION.




The Bobbsey Twins Books

For Little Men and Women

By LAURA LEE HOPE


Copyright publications which cannot be obtained elsewhere. Books that
will charm the hearts of the little ones, and of which they never will
tire. Small 12mo. Handsomely printed and illustrated. Bound in cloth,
stamped in Colors.

PRICE 35 CENTS PER VOLUME. POSTPAID.


THE BOBBSEY TWINS
 Or, Merry Days Indoors and Out

THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE COUNTRY

THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT THE SEASHORE


GROSSET & DUNLAP,--NEW YORK




THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON


12mo, averaging from 256 to 288 pages, each volume with half-tone
frontispiece. Handsomely bound in cloth. Printed wrappers.

PRICE, 40 CENTS PER VOLUME, POSTPAID

It is the purpose of these spirited tales to convey in a realistic way
the wonderful advances in land and sea locomotion. Stories like these
impress themselves on the youthful memory and their reading is
productive only of good.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  Or, Fun and Adventure on the Road

Tom longed for a motor cycle and got one unexpectedly.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
  Or, The Rivals of Lake Carlopa

There are some great races, and a thrilling experience with an  ronaut.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  Or, The Stirring Cruise of the Red Cloud

Telling how the airship was built, of a trial trip and a smash-up in
mid-air.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  Or, Under the Ocean for Sunken Treasure

The submarine is stopped by a warship and those on board are made
prisoners, but escape.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  Or, The Speediest Car on the Road

A runabout is built, and then begins a series of adventures.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  Or, Daring Adventures in Elephant Land.

Thrilling adventures in the African jungle with the red pygmies and fine
work with the electric rifle.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  Or, The Quickest Flight on Record.

The Humming Bird--a racer of terrific speed--wins a ten thousand dollar
prize against other bird-men.


TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  Or, The Wreck of the Airship

Tom and his friends go to Alaska to search for gold in the caves of ice
and are almost defeated.


TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  Or, The Secret of Phantom Mountain

Tom and his friends start out in the "Red Cloud" to find the diamond
makers that they are told are hid in the Rocky Mountains.


TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  Or, The Castaways of Earthquake Island

A trip to Cape May, a terrific storm and a wreck on a West Indian
island. A wireless plant saves them.


GROSSET & DUNLAP--NEW YORK





       *       *       *       *       *



