
MISS OR MRS.?

by Wilkie Collins




PERSONS OF THE STORY.

     Sir Joseph Graybrooke. . . . . . . . . .(Knight)
     Richard Turlington . . . . (Of the Levant Trade)
     Launcelot Linzie . .(Of the College of Surgeons)
     James Dicas. . . . . .(Of the Roll of Attorneys)
     Thomas Wildfang. . . . . .(Superannuated Seaman)
     Miss Graybrooke. . . . . . (Sir Joseph's Sister)
     Natalie. . . . . . . . . (Sir Joseph's Daughter)
     Lady Winwood . . . . . . . .(Sir Joseph's Niece)
     Amelia} Sophia}. (Lady Winwood's Stepdaughter's)
     and Dorothea}



Period: THE PRESENT TIME. Place: ENGLAND.




FIRST SCENE

At Sea.

The night had come to an end. The new-born day waited for its quickening
light in the silence that is never known on land--the silence before
sunrise, in a calm at sea.

Not a breath came from the dead air. Not a ripple stirred on the
motionless water. Nothing changed but the softly-growing light; nothing
moved but the lazy mist, curling up to meet the sun, its master, on the
eastward sea. By fine gradations, the airy veil of morning thinned in
substance as it rose--thinned, till there dawned through it in the first
rays of sunlight the tall white sails of a Schooner Yacht.

From stem to stern silence possessed the vessel--as silence possessed
the sea.

But one living creature was on deck--the man at the helm, dozing
peaceably with his arm over the useless tiller. Minute by minute the
light grew, and the heat grew with it; and still the helmsman slumbered,
the heavy sails hung noiseless, the quiet water lay sleeping against
the vessel's sides. The whole orb of the sun was visible above the
water-line, when the first sound pierced its way through the morning
silence. From far off over the shining white ocean, the cry of a
sea-bird reached the yacht on a sudden out of the last airy circles of
the waning mist.

The sleeper at the helm woke; looked up at the idle sails, and yawned
in sympathy with them; looked out at the sea on either side of him, and
shook his head obstinately at the superior obstinacy of the calm.

"Blow, my little breeze!" said the man, whistling the sailor's
invocation to the wind softly between his teeth. "Blow, my little
breeze!"

"How's her head?" cried a bold and brassy voice, hailing the deck from
the cabin staircase.

"Anywhere you like, master; all round the compass."

The voice was followed by the man. The owner of the yacht appeared on
deck.

Behold Richard Turlington, Esq., of the great Levant firm of Pizzituti,
Turlington & Branca! Aged eight-and-thirty; standing stiffly and
sturdily at a height of not more than five feet six--Mr. Turlington
presented to the view of his fellow-creatures a face of the
perpendicular order of human architecture. His forehead was a straight
line, his upper lip was another, his chin was the straightest and the
longest line of all. As he turned his swarthy countenance eastward,
and shaded his light gray eyes from the sun, his knotty hand plainly
revealed that it had got him his living by its own labor at one time or
another in his life. Taken on the whole, this was a man whom it might
be easy to respect, but whom it would be hard to love. Better company at
the official desk than at the social table. Morally and physically--if
the expression may be permitted--a man without a bend in him.

"A calm yesterday," grumbled Richard Turlington, looking with stubborn
deliberation all round him. "And a calm to-day. Ha! next season I'll
have the vessel fitted with engines. I hate this!"

"Think of the filthy coals, and the infernal vibration, and leave your
beautiful schooner as she is. We are out for a holiday. Let the wind and
the sea take a holiday too."

Pronouncing those words of remonstrance, a slim, nimble, curly-headed
young gentleman joined Richard Turlington on deck, with his clothes
under his arm, his towels in his hand, and nothing on him but the
night-gown in which he had stepped out of his bed.

"Launcelot Linzie, you have been received on board my vessel in the
capacity of medical attendant on Miss Natalie Graybrooke, at her
father's request. Keep your place, if you please. When I want your
advice, I'll ask you for it." Answering in those terms, the elder man
fixed his colorless gray eyes on the younger with an expression which
added plainly, "There won't be room enough in this schooner much longer
for me and for you."

Launcelot Linzie had his reasons (apparently) for declining to let his
host offend him on any terms whatever.

"Thank you!" he rejoined, in a tone of satirical good humor. "It isn't
easy to keep my place on board your vessel. I can't help presuming
to enjoy myself as if I was the owner. The life is such a new one--to
_me!_ It's so delightfully easy, for instance, to wash yourself here.
On shore it's a complicated question of jugs and basins and tubs; one is
always in danger of breaking something, or spoiling something. Here you
have only to jump out of bed, to run up on deck, and to do this!"

He turned, and scampered to the bows of the vessel. In one instant he
was out of his night-gown, in another he was on the bulwark, in a third
he was gamboling luxuriously in sixty fathoms of salt-water.

Turlington's eyes followed him with a reluctant, uneasy attention as
he swam round the vessel, the only moving object in view. Turlington's
mind, steady and slow in all its operations, set him a problem to be
solved, on given conditions, as follows:

"Launcelot Linzie is fifteen years younger than I am. Add to that,
Launcelot Linzie is Natalie Graybrooke's cousin. Given those two
advantages--Query: Has he taken Natalie's fancy?"

Turning that question slowly over and over in his mind, Richard
Turlington seated himself in a corner at the stern of the vessel. He
was still at work on the problem, when the young surgeon returned to his
cabin to put the finishing touches to his toilet. He had not reached the
solution when the steward appeared an hour later and said, "Breakfast is
ready, sir!"

They were a party of five round the cabin table.

First, Sir Joseph Graybrooke. Inheritor of a handsome fortune made by
his father and his grandfather in trade. Mayor, twice elected, of a
thriving provincial town. Officially privileged, while holding that
dignity, to hand a silver trowel to a royal personage condescending to
lay a first stone of a charitable edifice. Knighted, accordingly, in
honor of the occasion. Worthy of the honor and worthy of the occasion.
A type of his eminently respectable class. Possessed of an amiable, rosy
face, and soft, silky white hair. Sound in his principles; tidy in his
dress; blessed with moderate politics and a good digestion--a harmless,
healthy, spruce, speckless, weak-minded old man.

Secondly, Miss Lavinia Graybrooke, Sir Joseph's maiden sister.
Personally, Sir Joseph in petticoats. If you knew one you knew the
other.

Thirdly, Miss Natalie Graybrooke--Sir Joseph's only child.

She had inherited the personal appearance and the temperament of her
mother--dead many years since. There had been a mixture of Negro
blood and French blood in the late Lady Graybrooke's family, settled
originally in Martinique. Natalie had her mother's warm dusky color, her
mother's superb black hair, and her mother's melting, lazy, lovely
brown eyes. At fifteen years of age (dating from her last birthday) she
possessed the development of the bosom and limbs which in England is
rarely attained before twenty. Everything about the girl--except her
little rosy ears--was on a grand Amazonian scale. Her shapely hand was
long and large; her supple waist was the waist of a woman. The indolent
grace of all her movements had its motive power in an almost masculine
firmness of action and profusion of physical resource. This remarkable
bodily development was far from being accompanied by any corresponding
development of character. Natalie's manner was the gentle, innocent
manner of a young girl. She had her father's sweet temper ingrafted on
her mother's variable Southern nature. She moved like a goddess, and she
laughed like a child. Signs of maturing too rapidly--of outgrowing her
strength, as the phrase went--had made their appearance in Sir
Joseph's daughter during the spring. The family doctor had suggested
a sea-voyage, as a wise manner of employing the fine summer months.
Richard Turlington's yacht was placed at her disposal, with Richard
Turlington himself included as one of the fixtures of the vessel.
With her father and her aunt to keep up round her the atmosphere of
home--with Cousin Launcelot (more commonly known as "Launce") to
carry out, if necessary, the medical treatment prescribed by superior
authority on shore--the lovely invalid embarked on her summer cruise,
and sprang up into a new existence in the life-giving breezes of
the sea. After two happy months of lazy coasting round the shores of
England, all that remained of Natalie's illness was represented by a
delicious languor in her eyes, and an utter inability to devote herself
to anything which took the shape of a serious occupation. As she sat
at the cabin breakfast-table that morning, in her quaintly-made sailing
dress of old-fashioned nankeen--her inbred childishness of manner
contrasting delightfully with the blooming maturity of her form--the man
must have been trebly armed indeed in the modern philosophy who could
have denied that the first of a woman's rights is the right of being
beautiful; and the foremost of a woman's merits, the merit of being
young!

The other two persons present at the table were the two gentlemen who
have already appeared on the deck of the yacht.

"Not a breath of wind stirring!" said Richard Turlington. "The weather
has got a grudge against us. We have drifted about four or five miles in
the last eight-and-forty hours. You will never take another cruise with
me--you must be longing to get on shore."

He addressed himself to Natalie; plainly eager to make himself agreeable
to the young lady--and plainly unsuccessful in producing any impression
on her. She made a civil answer; and looked at her tea-cup, instead of
looking at Richard Turlington.

"You might fancy yourself on shore at this moment," said Launce. "The
vessel is as steady as a house, and the swing-table we are eating our
breakfast on is as even as your dining-room table at home."

He too addressed himself to Natalie, but without betraying the anxiety
to please her which had been shown by the other. For all that, _he_
diverted the girl's attention from her tea-cup; and _his_ idea instantly
awakened a responsive idea in Natalie's mind.

"It will be so strange on shore," she said, "to find myself in a room
that never turns on one side, and to sit at a table that never tilts
down to my knees at one time, or rises up to my chin at another. How I
shall miss the wash of the water at my ear, and the ring of the bell
on deck when I am awake at night on land! No interest there in how the
wind blows, or how the sails are set. No asking your way of the sun,
when you are lost, with a little brass instrument and a morsel of pencil
and paper. No delightful wandering wherever the wind takes you, without
the worry of planning beforehand where you are to go. Oh how I shall
miss the dear, changeable, inconstant sea! And how sorry I am I'm not a
man and a sailor!"

This to the guest admitted on board on sufferance, and not one word of
it addressed, even by chance, to the owner of the yacht!

Richard Turlington's heavy eyebrows contracted with an unmistakable
expression of pain.

"If this calm weather holds," he went on, addressing himself to Sir
Joseph, "I am afraid, Graybrooke, I shall not be able to bring you back
to the port we sailed from by the end of the week."

"Whenever you like, Richard," answered the old gentleman, resignedly.
"Any time will do for me."

"Any time within reasonable limits, Joseph," said Miss Lavinia,
evidently feeling that her brother was conceding too much. She spoke
with Sir Joseph's amiable smile and Sir Joseph's softly-pitched voice.
Two twin babies could hardly have been more like one another.

While these few words were being exchanged among the elders, a private
communication was in course of progress between the two young people
under the cabin table. Natalie's smartly-slippered foot felt its way
cautiously inch by inch over the carpet till it touched Launce's boot.
Launce, devouring his breakfast, instantly looked up from his plate,
and then, at a second touch from Natalie, looked down again in a violent
hurry. After pausing to make sure that she was not noticed, Natalie
took up her knife. Under a perfectly-acted pretense of toying with it
absently, in the character of a young lady absorbed in thought, she
began dividing a morsel of ham left on the edge of her plate, into six
tiny pieces. Launce's eye looked in sidelong expectation at the divided
and subdivided ham. He was evidently waiting to see the collection of
morsels put to some telegraphic use, previously determined on between
his neighbor and himself.

In the meanwhile the talk proceeded among the other persons at the
breakfast-table. Miss Lavinia addressed herself to Launce.

"Do you know, you careless boy, you gave me a fright this morning? I was
sleeping with my cabin window open, and I was awoke by an awful splash
in the water. I called for the stewardess. I declare I thought somebody
had fallen overboard!"

Sir Joseph looked up briskly; his sister had accidentally touched on an
old association.

"Talk of falling overboard," he began, "reminds me of an extraordinary
adventure--"

There Launce broke in, making his apologies.

"It shan't occur again, Miss Lavinia," he said. "To-morrow morning I'll
oil myself all over, and slip into the water as silently as a seal."

"Of an extraordinary adventure," persisted Sir Joseph, "which happened
to me many years ago, when I was a young man. Lavinia?"

He stopped, and looked interrogatively at his sister. Miss Graybrooke
nodded her head responsively, and settled herself in her chair, as if
summoning her attention in anticipation of a coming demand on it. To
persons well acquainted with the brother and sister these proceedings
were ominous of an impending narrative, protracted to a formidable
length. The two always told a story in couples, and always differed
with each other about the facts, the sister politely contradicting
the brother when it was Sir Joseph's story, and the brother politely
contradicting the sister when it was Miss Lavinia's story. Separated one
from the other, and thus relieved of their own habitual interchange
of contradiction, neither of them had ever been known to attempt the
relation of the simplest series of events without breaking down.

"It was five years before I knew you, Richard," proceeded Sir Joseph.

"Six years," said Miss Graybrooke.

"Excuse me, Lavinia."

"No, Joseph, I have it down in my diary."

"Let us waive the point." (Sir Joseph invariably used this formula as a
means of at once conciliating his sister, and getting a fresh start for
his story.) "I was cruising off the Mersey in a Liverpool pilot-boat. I
had hired the boat in company with a friend of mine, formerly notorious
in London society, under the nickname (derived from the peculiar brown
color of his whiskers) of 'Mahogany Dobbs.'"

"The color of his liveries, Joseph, not the color of his whiskers."

"My dear Lavinia, you are thinking of 'Sea-green Shaw,' so called from
the extraordinary liveries he adopted for his servants in the year when
he was sheriff."

"I think not, Joseph."

"I beg your pardon, Lavinia."

Richard Turlington's knotty fingers drummed impatiently on the table. He
looked toward Natalie. She was idly arranging her little morsels of
ham in a pattern on her plate. Launcelot Linzie, still more idly, was
looking at the pattern. Seeing what he saw now, Richard solved the
problem which had puzzled him on deck. It was simply impossible that
Natalie's fancy could be really taken by such an empty-headed fool as
that!

Sir Joseph went on with his story:

"We were some ten or a dozen miles off the mouth of the Mersey--"

"Nautical miles, Joseph."

"It doesn't matter, Lavinia."

"Excuse me, brother, the late great and good Doctor Johnson said
accuracy ought always to be studied even in the most trifling things."

"They were common miles, Lavinia."

"They were nautical miles, Joseph."

"Let us waive the point. Mahogany Dobbs and I happened to be below in
the cabin, occupied--"

Here Sir Joseph paused (with his amiable smile) to consult his
memory. Miss Lavinia waited (with _her_ amiable smile) for the coming
opportunity of setting her brother right. At the same moment Natalie
laid down her knife and softly touched Launce under the table. When
she thus claimed his attention the six pieces of ham were arranged as
follows in her plate: Two pieces were placed opposite each other, and
four pieces were ranged perpendicularly under them. Launce looked, and
twice touched Natalie under the table. Interpreted by the Code agreed
on between the two, the signal in the plate meant, "I must see you in
private." And Launce's double touch answered, "After breakfast."

Sir Joseph proceeded with his story. Natalie took up her knife again.
Another signal coming!

"We were both down in the cabin, occupied in finishing our dinner--"

"Just sitting down to lunch, Joseph."

"My dear! I ought to know."

"I only repeat what I heard, brother. The last time you told the story,
you and your friend were sitting down to lunch."

"We won't particularize, Lavinia. Suppose we say occupied over a meal?"

"If it is of no more importance than that, Joseph, it would be surely
better to leave it out altogether."

"Let us waive the point. Well, we were suddenly alarmed by a shout on
deck, 'Man over-board!' We both rushed up the cabin stairs, naturally
under the impression that one of our crew had fallen into the sea: an
impression shared, I ought to add, by the man at the helm, who had given
the alarm."

Sir Joseph paused again. He was approaching one of the great dramatic
points in his story, and was naturally anxious to present it as
impressively as possible. He considered with himself, with his head a
little on one side. Miss Lavinia considered with _herself_, with _her_
head a little on one side. Natalie laid down her knife again, and again
touched Launce under the table. This time there were five pieces of ham
ranged longitudinally on the plate, with one piece immediately under
them at the center of the line. Interpreted by the Code, this signal
indicated two ominous words, "Bad news." Launce looked significantly
at the owner of the yacht (meaning of the look, "Is he at the bottom of
it?"). Natalie frowned in reply (meaning of the frown, "Yes, he is").
Launce looked down again into the plate. Natalie instantly pushed all
the pieces of ham together in a little heap (meaning of the heap, "No
more to say").

"Well?" said Richard Turlington, turning sharply on Sir Joseph. "Get on
with your story. What next?"

Thus far he had not troubled himself to show even a decent pretense of
interest in his old friend's perpetually-interrupted narrative. It was
only when Sir Joseph had reached his last sentence--intimating that the
man overboard might turn out in course of time not to be a man of the
pilot-boat's crew--it was only then that Turlington sat up in his chair,
and showed signs of suddenly feeling a strong interest in the progress
of the story.

Sir Joseph went on:

"As soon as we got on deck, we saw the man in the water, astern. Our
vessel was hove up in the wind, and the boat was lowered. The master and
one of the men took the oars. All told, our crew were seven in number.
Two away in the boat, a third at the helm, and, to my amazement, when
I looked round, the other four behind me making our number complete.
At the same moment Mahogany Dobbs, who was looking through a telescope,
called out, 'Who the devil can he be? The man is floating on a hen-coop,
and we have got nothing of the sort on board this pilot-boat.'"

The one person present who happened to notice Richard Turlington's
face when those words were pronounced was Launcelot Linzie. He--and he
alone--saw the Levant trader's swarthy complexion fade slowly to a
livid ashen gray; his eyes the while fixing themselves on Sir Joseph
Graybrooke with a furtive glare in them like the glare in the eyes of a
wild beast. Apparently conscious that Launce was looking at him--though
he never turned his head Launce's way--he laid his elbow on the table,
lifted his arm, and so rested his face on his hand, while the story went
on, as to screen it effectually from the young surgeon's view.

"The man was brought on board," proceeded Sir Joseph, "sure enough, with
a hen-coop--on which he had been found floating. The poor wretch was
blue with terror and exposure in the water; he fainted when we lifted
him on deck. When he came to himself he told us a horrible story. He was
a sick and destitute foreign seaman, and he had hidden himself in the
hold of an English vessel (bound to a port in his native country) which
had sailed from Liverpool that morning. He had been discovered, and
brought before the captain. The captain, a monster in human form, if
ever there was one yet--"

Before the next word of the sentence could pass Sir Joseph's lips,
Turlington startled the little party in the cabin by springing suddenly
to his feet.

"The breeze!" he cried; "the breeze at last!"

As he spoke, he wheeled round to the cabin door so as to turn his back
on his guests, and hailed the deck.

"Which way is the wind?"

"There is not a breath of wind, sir."

Not the slightest movement in the vessel had been perceptible in the
cabin; not a sound had been audible indicating the rising of the breeze.
The owner of the yacht--accustomed to the sea, capable, if necessary,
of sailing his own vessel--had surely committed a strange mistake! He
turned again to his friends, and made his apologies with an excess of
polite regret far from characteristic of him at other times and under
other circumstances.

"Go on," he said to Sir Joseph, when he had got to the end of his
excuses; "I never heard such an interesting story in my life. Pray go
on!"

The request was not an easy one to comply with. Sir Joseph's ideas
had been thrown into confusion. Miss Lavinia's contradictions (held in
reserve) had been scattered beyond recall. Both brother and sister were,
moreover, additionally hindered in recovering the control of their own
resources by the look and manner of their host. He alarmed, instead
of encouraging the two harmless old people, by fronting them almost
fiercely, with his elbows squared on the table, and his face expressive
of a dogged resolution to sit there and listen, if need be, for the rest
of his life. Launce was the person who set Sir Joseph going again. After
first looking attentively at Richard, he took his uncle straight back to
the story by means of a question, thus:

"You don't mean to say that the captain of the ship threw the man
overboard?"

"That is just what he did, Launce. The poor wretch was too ill to work
his passage. The captain declared he would have no idle foreign vagabond
in his ship to eat up the provisions of Englishmen who worked. With his
own hands he cast the hen-coop into the water, and (assisted by one of
his sailors) he threw the man after it, and told him to float back to
Liverpool with the evening tide."

"A lie!" cried Turlington, addressing himself, not to Sir Joseph, but to
Launce.

"Are you acquainted with the circumstances?" asked Launce, quietly.

"I know nothing about the circumstances. I say, from my own experience,
that foreign sailors are even greater blackguards than English sailors.
The man had met with an accident, no doubt. The rest of his story was a
lie, and the object of it was to open Sir Joseph's purse."

Sir Joseph mildly shook his head.

"No lie, Richard. Witnesses proved that the man had spoken the truth."

"Witnesses? Pooh! More liars, you mean."

"I went to the owners of the vessel," pursued Sir Joseph. "I got from
them the names of the officers and the crew, and I waited, leaving the
case in the hands of the Liverpool police. The ship was wrecked at the
mouth of the Amazon, but the crew and the cargo were saved. The men
belonging to Liverpool came back. They were a bad set, I grant you. But
they were examined separately about the treatment of the foreign sailor,
and they all told the same story. They could give no account of their
captain, nor of the sailor who had been his accomplice in the crime,
except that they had not embarked in the ship which brought the rest of
the crew to England. Whatever may have become of the captain since, he
certainly never returned to Liverpool."

"Did you find out his name?"

The question was asked by Turlington. Even Sir Joseph, the least
observant of men, noticed that it was put with a perfectly unaccountable
irritability of manner.

"Don't be angry, Richard." said the old gentleman. "What is there to be
angry about?"

"I don't know what you mean. I'm not angry--I'm only curious. _Did_ you
find out who he was?"

"I did. His name was Goward. He was well known at Liverpool as a very
clever and a very dangerous man. Quite young at the time I am speaking
of, and a first-rate sailor; famous for taking command of unseaworthy
ships and vagabond crews. Report described him to me as having made
considerable sums of money in that way, for a man in his position;
serving firms, you know, with a bad name, and running all sorts of
desperate risks. A sad ruffian, Richard! More than once in trouble, on
both sides of the Atlantic, for acts of violence and cruelty. Dead, I
dare say, long since."

"Or possibly," said Launce, "alive, under another name, and thriving in
a new way of life, with more desperate risks in it, of some other sort."

"Are _you_ acquainted with the circumstances?" asked Turlington,
retorting Launce's question on him, with a harsh ring of defiance in his
brassy voice.

"What became of the poor foreign sailor, papa?" said Natalie, purposely
interrupting Launce before he could meet the question angrily asked of
him, by an angry reply.

"We made a subscription, and spoke to his consul, my dear. He went back
to his country, poor fellow, comfortably enough."

"And there is an end of Sir Joseph's story," said Turlington, rising
noisily from his chair. "It's a pity we haven't got a literary man on
board--he would make a novel of it." He looked up at the skylight as he
got on his feet. "Here is the breeze, this time," he exclaimed, "and no
mistake!"

It was true. At last the breeze had come. The sails flapped, the main
boom swung over with a thump, and the stagnant water, stirred at last,
bubbled merrily past the vessel's sides.

"Come on deck, Natalie, and get some fresh air," said Miss Lavinia,
leading the way to the cabin door.

Natalie held up the skirt of her nankeen dress, and exhibited the purple
trimming torn away over an extent of some yards.

"Give me half an hour first, aunt, in my cabin," she said, "to mend
this."

Miss Lavinia elevated her venerable eyebrows in amazement.

"You have done nothing but tear your dresses, my dear, since you have
been in Mr. Turlington's yacht. Most extraordinary! I have torn none of
mine during the whole cruise."

Natalie's dark color deepened a shade. She laughed, a little uneasily.
"I am so awkward on board ship," she replied, and turned away and shut
herself up in her cabin.

Richard Turlington produced his case of cigars.

"Now is the time," he said to Sir Joseph, "for the best cigar of the
day--the cigar after breakfast. Come on deck."

"You will join us, Launce?" said Sir Joseph.

"Give me half an hour first over my books," Launce replied. "I mustn't
let my medical knowledge get musty at sea, and I might not feel inclined
to study later in the day."

"Quite right, my dear boy, quite right."

Sir Joseph patted his nephew approvingly on the shoulder. Launce turned
away on _his_ side, and shut himself up in his cabin.

The other three ascended together to the deck.




SECOND SCENE.

The Store-Room.

Persons possessed of sluggish livers and tender hearts find two serious
drawbacks to the enjoyment of a cruise at sea. It is exceedingly
difficult to get enough walking exercise; and it is next to impossible
(where secrecy is an object) to make love without being found out.
Reverting for the moment to the latter difficulty only, life within the
narrow and populous limits of a vessel may be defined as essentially
life in public. From morning to night you are in your neighbor's way, or
your neighbor is in your way. As a necessary result of these conditions,
the rarest of existing men may be defined as the man who is capable
of stealing a kiss at sea without discovery. An inbred capacity for
stratagem of the finest sort; inexhaustible inventive resources;
patience which can flourish under superhuman trials; presence of mind
which can keep its balance victoriously under every possible stress of
emergency--these are some of the qualifications which must accompany
Love on a cruise, when Love embarks in the character of a contraband
commodity not duly entered on the papers of the ship.

Having established a Code of Signals which enabled them to communicate
privately, while the eyes and ears of others were wide open on every
side of them, Natalie and Launce were next confronted by the more
serious difficulty of finding a means of meeting together at stolen
interviews on board the yacht. Possessing none of those precious
moral qualifications already enumerated as the qualifications of an
accomplished lover at sea, Launce had proved unequal to grapple with the
obstacles in his way. Left to her own inventive resources, Natalie
had first suggested the young surgeon's medical studies as Launce's
unanswerable excuse for shutting himself up at intervals in the lower
regions, and had then hit on the happy idea of tearing her trimmings,
and condemning herself to repair her own carelessness, as the
all-sufficient reason for similar acts of self-seclusion on her side.
In this way the lovers contrived, while the innocent ruling authorities
were on deck, to meet privately below them, on the neutral ground of the
main cabin; and there, by previous arrangement at the breakfast-table,
they were about to meet privately now.

Natalie's door was, as usual on these occasions, the first that opened;
for this sound reason, that Natalie's quickness was the quickness to be
depended on in case of accident.

She looked up at the sky-light. There were the legs of the two gentlemen
and the skirts of her aunt visible (and stationary) on the lee side of
the deck. She advanced a few steps and listened. There was a pause in
the murmur of the voices above. She looked up again. One pair of legs
(not her father's) had disappeared. Without an instant's hesitation,
Natalie darted back to her own door, just in time to escape Richard
Turlington descending the cabin stairs. All he did was to go to one
of the drawers under the main-cabin book-case and to take out a map,
ascending again immediately to the deck. Natalie's guilty conscience
rushed instantly, nevertheless, to the conclusion that Richard suspected
her. When she showed herself for the second time, instead of venturing
into the cabin, she called across it in a whisper,

"Launce!"

Launce appeared at his door. He was peremptorily checked before he could
cross the threshold.

"Don't stir a step! Richard has been down in the cabin! Richard suspects
us!"

"Nonsense! Come out."

"Nothing will induce me, unless you can find some other place than the
cabin."

Some other place? How easy to find it on land! How apparently impossible
at sea! There was the forecastle (full of men) at one end of the vessel.
There was the sail room (full of sails) at the other. There was the
ladies' cabin (used as the ladies' dressing-room; inaccessible, in that
capacity, to every male human being on board). Was there any disposable
inclosed space to be found amidships? On one side there were the
sleeping berths of the sailing-master and his mate (impossible to
borrow _them_). On the other side was the steward's store-room. Launce
considered for a moment. The steward's store-room was just the thing!

"Where are you going?" asked Natalie, as her lover made straight for a
closed door at the lower extremity of the main cabin.

"To speak to the steward, darling. Wait one moment, and you will see me
again."

Launce opened the store-room door, and discovered, not the steward, but
his wife, who occupied the situation of stewardess on board the vessel.
The accident was, in this case, a lucky one. Having stolen several
kisses at sea, and having been discovered (in every case) either by the
steward or his wife, Launce felt no difficulty in prefacing his request
to be allowed the use of the room by the plainest allusion to
his relations with Natalie. He could count on the silence of the
sympathizing authorities in this region of the vessel, having wisely
secured them as accomplices by the usual persuasion of the pecuniary
sort. Of the two, however, the stewardess, as a woman, was the more
likely to lend a ready ear to Launce's entreaties in his present
emergency. After a faint show of resistance, she consented, not only to
leave the room, but to keep her husband out of it, on the understanding
that it was not to be occupied for more than ten minutes. Launce made
the signal to Natalie at one door, while the stewardess went out by the
other. In a moment more the lovers were united in a private room. Is it
necessary to say in what language the proceedings were opened? Surely
not! There is an inarticulate language of the lips in use on these
occasions in which we are all proficient, though we sometimes forget it
in later life. Natalie seated herself on a locker. The tea, sugar, and
spices were at her back, a side of bacon swung over her head, and a net
full of lemons dangled before her face. It might not be roomy, but it
was snug and comfortable.

"Suppose they call for the steward?" she suggested. ("Don't, Launce!")

"Never mind. We shall be safe enough if they do. The steward has only to
show himself on deck, and they will suspect nothing."

"Do be quiet, Launce! I have got dreadful news to tell you. And,
besides, my aunt will expect to see me with my braid sewn on again."

She had brought her needle and thread with her. Whipping up the skirt
of her dress on her knee, she bent forward over it, and set herself
industriously to the repair of the torn trimming. In this position her
lithe figure showed charmingly its firm yet easy line. The needle, in
her dexterous brown fingers, flew through its work. The locker was a
broad one; Launce was able to seat himself partially behind her. In this
position who could have resisted the temptation to lift up her great
knot of broadly-plaited black hair, and to let the warm, dusky nape
of her neck disclose itself to view? Who, looking at it, could fail to
revile the senseless modern fashion of dressing the hair, which hides
the double beauty of form and color that nestles at the back of a
woman's neck? From time to time, as the interview proceeded, Launce's
lips emphasized the more important words occurring in his share of the
conversation on the soft, fragrant skin which the lifted hair let him
see at intervals. In Launce's place, sir, you would have done it too.

"Now, Natalie, what is the news?"

"He has spoken to papa, Launce."

"Richard Turlington?"

"Yes."

"D--n him!"

Natalie started. A curse addressed to the back of your neck, instantly
followed by a blessing in the shape of a kiss, is a little trying when
you are not prepared for it.

"Don't do that again, Launce! It was while you were on deck smoking,
and when I was supposed to be fast asleep. I opened the ventilator in
my cabin door, dear, and I heard every word they said. He waited till my
aunt was out of the way, and he had got papa all to himself, and then he
began it in that horrible, downright voice of his--'Graybrooke! how much
longer am I to wait?'"

"Did he say that?"

"No more swearing, Launce! Those were the words. Papa didn't understand
them. He only said (poor dear!)--'Bless my soul, Richard, what do you
want?' Richard soon explained himself. 'Who could he be waiting for--but
Me?' Papa said something about my being so young. Richard stopped his
mouth directly. 'Girls were like fruit; some ripened soon, and some
ripened late. Some were women at twenty, and some were women at sixteen.
It was impossible to look at me, and not see that I was like a new being
after my two months at sea,' and so on and so on. Papa behaved like an
angel. He still tried to put it off. 'Plenty of time, Richard, plenty
of time.' 'Plenty of time for _her_' (was the wretch's answer to that);
'but not for _me_. Think of all I have to offer her' (as if I cared for
his money!); 'think how long I have looked upon her as growing up to
be my wife' (growing up for _him_--monstrous!), 'and don't keep me in
a state of uncertainty, which it gets harder and harder for a man in my
position to endure!' He was really quite eloquent. His voice trembled.
There is no doubt, dear, that he is very, very fond of me."

"And you feel flattered by it, of course?"

"Don't talk nonsense. I feel a little frightened at it, I can tell you."

"Frightened? Did _you_ notice him this morning?"

"I? When?"

"When your father was telling that story about the man overboard."

"No. What did he do? Tell me, Launce."

"I'll tell you directly. How did it all end last night? Did your father
make any sort of promise?"

"You know Richard's way; Richard left him no other choice. Papa had to
promise before he was allowed to go to bed."

"To let Turlington marry you?"

"Yes; the week after my next birthday."

"The week after next Christmas-day?"

"Yes. Papa is to speak to me as soon as we are at home again, and my
married life is to begin with the New Year."

"Are you in earnest, Natalie? Do you really mean to say it has gone as
far as that?"

"They have settled everything. The splendid establishment we are to set
up, the great income we are to have. I heard papa tell Richard that half
his fortune should go to me on my wedding-day. It was sickening to hear
how much they made of Money, and how little they thought of Love. What
am I to do, Launce?"

"That's easily answered, my darling. In the first place, you are to make
up your mind not to marry Richard Turlington--"

"Do talk reasonably. You know I have done all I could. I have told papa
that I can think of Richard as a friend, but not as a husband. He only
laughs at me, and says, 'Wait a little, and you will alter your opinion,
my dear.' You see Richard is everything to him; Richard has always
managed his affairs, and has saved him from losing by bad speculations;
Richard has known me from the time when I was a child; Richard has a
splendid business, and quantities of money. Papa can't even imagine that
I can resist Richard. I have tried my aunt; I have told her he is too
old for me. All she says is, 'Look at your father; he was much older
than your mother, and what a happy marriage theirs was.' Even if I said
in so many words, 'I won't marry Richard,' what good would it do to us?
Papa is the best and dearest old man in the world; but oh, he is so fond
of money! He believes in nothing else. He would be furious--yes, kind as
he is, he would be furious--if I even hinted that I was fond of _you_.
Any man who proposed to marry me--if he couldn't match the fortune that
I should bring him by a fortune of his own--would be a lunatic in papa's
eyes. He wouldn't think it necessary to answer him; he would ring the
bell, and have him shown out of the house. I am exaggerating nothing,
Launce; you know I am speaking the truth. There is no hope in the
future--that I can see--for either of us.

"Have you done, Natalie? I have something to say on my side if you
have."

"What is it?"

"If things go on as they are going on now, shall I tell you how it will
end? It will end in your being Turlington's wife."

"Never!"

"So you say now; but you don't know what may happen between this and
Christmas-day. Natalie, there is only one way of making sure that you
will never marry Richard. Marry _me_."

"Without papa's consent?"

"Without saying a word to anybody till it's done."

"Oh, Launce! Launce!"

"My darling, every word you have said proves there is no other way.
Think of it, Natalie, think of it."

There was a pause. Natalie dropped her needle and thread, and hid her
face in her hands. "If my poor mother was only alive," she said; "if I
only had an elder sister to advise me, and to take my part."

She was evidently hesitating. Launce took a man's advantage of her
indecision. He pressed her without mercy.

"Do you love me?" he whispered, with his lips close to her ear.

"You know I do, dearly."

"Put it out of Richard's power to part us, Natalie."

"Part us? We are cousins: we have known each other since we were both
children. Even if he proposed parting us, papa wouldn't allow it."

"Mark my words, he _will_ propose it. As for your father, Richard
has only to lift his finger and your father obeys him. My love, the
happiness of both our lives is at stake." He wound his arm round her,
and gently drew her head back on his bosom, "Other girls have done it,
darling," he pleaded, "why shouldn't you?"

The effort to answer him was too much for her. She gave it up. A low
sigh fluttered through her lips. She nestled closer to him, and faintly
closed her eyes. The next instant she started up, trembling from head
to foot, and looked at the sky-light. Richard Turlington's voice was
suddenly audible on deck exactly above them.

"Graybrooke, I want to say a word to you about Launcelot Linzie."

Natalie's first impulse was to fly to the door. Hearing Launce's name on
Richard's lips, she checked herself. Something in Richard's tone roused
in her the curiosity which suspends fear. She waited, with her hand in
Launce's hand.

"If you remember," the brassy voice went on, "I doubted the wisdom of
taking him with us on this cruise. You didn't agree with me, and, at
your express request, I gave way. I did wrong. Launcelot Linzie is a
very presuming young man."

Sir Joseph's answer was accompanied by Sir Joseph's mellow laugh.

"My dear Richard! Surely you are a little hard on Launce?"

"You are not an observant man, Graybrooke. I am. I see signs of his
presuming with all of us, and especially with Natalie. I don't like
the manner in which he speaks to her and looks at her. He is unduly
familiar; he is insolently confidential. There must be a stop put to it.
In my position, my feelings ought to be regarded. I request you to check
the intimacy when we get on shore."

Sir Joseph's next words were spoken more seriously. He expressed his
surprise.

"My dear Richard, they are cousins, they have been playmates from
childhood. How _can_ you think of attaching the slightest importance to
anything that is said or done by poor Launce?"

There was a good-humored contempt in Sir Joseph's reference to "poor
Launce" which jarred on his daughter. He might almost have been alluding
to some harmless domestic animal. Natalie's color deepened. Her hand
pressed Launce's hand gently.

Turlington still persisted.

"I must once more request--seriously request--that you will check this
growing intimacy. I don't object to your asking him to the house when
you ask other friends. I only wish you (and expect you) to stop his
'dropping in,' as it is called, any hour of the day or evening when he
may have nothing to do. Is that understood between us?"

"If you make a point of it, Richard, of course it's understood between
us."

Launce looked at Natalie, as weak Sir Joseph consented in those words.

"What did I tell you?" he whispered.

Natalie hung her head in silence. There was a pause in the conversation
on deck. The two gentlemen walked away slowly toward the forward part of
the vessel.

Launce pursued his advantage.

"Your father leaves us no alternative," he said. "The door will be
closed against me as soon as we get on shore. If I lose you, Natalie, I
don't care what becomes of me. My profession may go to the devil. I have
nothing left worth living for."

"Hush! hush! don't talk in that way!"

Launce tried the soothing influence of persuasion once more.

"Hundreds and hundreds of people in our situation have married
privately--and have been forgiven afterward," he went on. "I won't ask
you to do anything in a hurry. I will be guided entirely by your wishes.
All I want to quiet my mind is to know that you are mine. Do, do, do
make me feel sure that Richard Turlington can't take you away from me."

"Don't press me, Launce." She dropped on the locker. "See!" she said.
"It makes me tremble only to think of it!"

"Who are you afraid of, darling? Not your father, surely?"

"Poor papa! I wonder whether he would be hard on me for the first time
in his life?" She stopped; her moistening eyes looked up imploringly in
Launce's face. "Don't press me!" she repeated faintly. "You know it's
wrong. We should have to confess it--and then what would happen?" She
paused again. Her eyes wandered nervously to the deck. Her voice dropped
to its lowest tones. "Think of Richard!" she said, and shuddered at the
terrors which that name conjured up. Before it was possible to say a
quieting word to her, she was again on her feet. Richard's name had
suddenly recalled to her memory Launce's mysterious allusion, at the
outset of the interview, to the owner of the yacht. "What was that you
said about Richard just now?" she asked. "You saw something (or heard
something) strange while papa was telling his story. What was it?"

"I noticed Richard's face, Natalie, when your father told us that the
man overboard was not one of the pilot-boat's crew. He turned ghastly
pale. He looked guilty--"

"Guilty? Of what?"

"He was present--I am certain of it--when the sailor was thrown into the
sea. For all I know, he may have been the man who did it."

Natalie started back in horror.

"Oh, Launce! Launce! that is too bad. You may not like Richard--you may
treat Richard as your enemy. But to say such a horrible thing of him as
that--It's not generous. It's not like _you_."

"If you had seen him, you would have said it too. I mean to make
inquiries--in your father's interests as well as in ours. My brother
knows one of the Commissioners of Police, and my brother can get it done
for me. Turlington has not always been in the Levant trade--I know that
already."

"For shame, Launce! for shame!"

The footsteps on deck were audible coming back. Natalie sprang to the
door leading into the cabin. Launce stopped her, as she laid her hand on
the lock. The footsteps went straight on toward the stern of the vessel.
Launce clasped both arms round her. Natalie gave way.

"Don't drive me to despair!" he said. "This is my last opportunity. I
don't ask you to say at once that you will marry me, I only ask you to
think of it. My darling! my angel! will you think of it?"

As he put the question, they might have heard (if they had not been
too completely engrossed in each other to listen) the footsteps
returning--one pair of footsteps only this time. Natalie's prolonged
absence had begun to surprise her aunt, and had roused a certain vague
distrust in Richard's mind. He walked back again along the deck by
himself. He looked absently in the main cabin as he passed it. The
store-room skylight came next. In his present frame of mind, would he
look absently into the store-room too?

"Let me go!" said Natalie.

Launce only answered, "Say yes," and held her as if he would never let
her go again.

At the same moment Miss Lavinia's voice rose shrill from the deck
calling for Natalie. There was but one way of getting free from him. She
said, "I'll think of it." Upon that, he kissed her and let her go.

The door had barely closed on her when the lowering face of Richard
Turlington appeared on a level with the side of the sky-light, looking
down into the store-room at Launce.

"Halloo!" he called out roughly. "What are you doing in the steward's
room?"

Launce took up a box of matches on the dresser. "I'm getting a light,"
he answered readily.

"I allow nobody below, forward of the main cabin, without my leave. The
steward has permitted a breach of discipline on board my vessel. The
steward will leave my service."

"The steward is not to blame."

"I am the judge of that. Not you."

Launce opened his lips to reply. An outbreak between the two men
appeared to be inevitable, when the sailing-master of the yacht joined
his employer on deck, and directed Turlington's attention to a question
which is never to be trifled with at sea, the question of wind and tide.

The yacht was then in the Bristol Channel, at the entrance to Bideford
Bay. The breeze, fast freshening, was also fast changing the direction
from which it blew. The favorable tide had barely three hours more to
run.

"The wind's shifting, sir," said the sailing-master. "I'm afraid we
shan't get round the point this tide, unless we lay her off on the other
tack."

Turlington shook his head.

"There are letters waiting for me at Bideford," he said. "We have lost
two days in the calm. I must send ashore to the post-office, whether we
lose the tide or not."

The vessel held on her course. Off the port of Bideford, the boat was
sent ashore to the post-office, the yacht standing off and on, waiting
the appearance of the letters. In the shortest time in which it was
possible to bring them on board the letters were in Turlington's hands.

The men were hauling the boat up to the davits, the yacht was already
heading off from the land, when Turlington startled everybody by one
peremptory word--"Stop!"

He had thrust all his letters but one into the pocket of his sailing
jacket, without reading them. The one letter which he had opened he held
in his closed hand. Rage was in his staring eyes, consternation was on
his pale lips.

"Lower the boat!" he shouted; "I must get to London to-night." He
stopped Sir Joseph, approaching him with opened mouth. "There's no time
for questions and answers. I must get back." He swung himself over the
side of the yacht, and addressed the sailing-master from the boat. "Save
the tide if you can; if you can't, put them ashore to-morrow at Minehead
or Watchet--wherever they like." He beckoned to Sir Joseph to lean over
the bulwark, and hear something he had to say in private. "Remember what
I told you about Launcelot Linzie!" he whispered fiercely. His parting
look was for Natalie. He spoke to her with a strong constraint on
himself, as gently as he could. "Don't be alarmed; I shall see you in
London." He seated himself in the boat and took the tiller. The last
words they heard him say were words urging the men at the oars to
lose no time. He was invariably brutal with the men. "Pull, you lazy
beggars!" he exclaimed, with an oath. "Pull for your lives!"




THIRD SCENE.

The Money Market.

Let us be serious.--Business!

The new scene plunges us head foremost into the affairs of the Levant
trading-house of Pizzituti, Turlington & Branca. What on earth do we
know about the Levant Trade? Courage! If we have ever known what it is
to want money we are perfectly familiar with the subject at starting.
The Levant Trade does occasionally get into difficulties.--Turlington
wanted money.

The letter which had been handed to him on board the yacht was from his
third partner, Mr. Branca, and was thus expressed:

"A crisis in the trade. All right, so far--except our business with
the small foreign firms. Bills to meet from those quarters, (say) forty
thousand pounds--and, I fear, no remittances to cover them. Particulars
stated in another letter addressed to you at Post-office, Ilfracombe. I
am quite broken down with anxiety, and confined to my bed. Pizzituti is
still detained at Smyrna. Come back at once."

The same evening Turlington was at his office in Austin Friars,
investigating the state of affairs, with his head clerk to help him.

Stated briefly, the business of the firm was of the widely miscellaneous
sort. They plied a brisk trade in a vast variety of commodities. Nothing
came amiss to them, from Manchester cotton manufactures to Smyrna figs.
They had branch houses at Alexandria and Odessa, and correspondents
here, there, and everywhere, along the shores of the Mediterranean, and
in the ports of the East. These correspondents were the persons alluded
to in Mr. Branca's letter as "small foreign firms;" and they had
produced the serious financial crisis in the affairs of the great house
in Austin Friars, which had hurried Turlington up to London.

Every one of these minor firms claimed and received the privilege of
drawing bills on Pizzituti, Turlington & Branca for amounts varying
from four to six thousand pounds--on no better security than a verbal
understanding that the money to pay the bills should be forwarded before
they fell due. Competition, it is needless to say, was at the bottom of
this insanely reckless system of trading. The native firms laid it down
as a rule that they would decline to transact business with any house
in the trade which refused to grant them their privilege. In the ease of
Turlington's house, the foreign merchants had drawn their bills on him
for sums large in the aggregate, if not large in themselves; had long
since turned those bills into cash in their own markets, for their own
necessities; and had now left the money which their paper represented
to be paid by their London correspondents as it fell due. In some
instances, they had sent nothing but promises and excuses. In others,
they had forwarded drafts on firms which had failed already, or which
were about to fail, in the crisis. After first exhausting his
resources in ready money, Mr. Branca had provided for the more pressing
necessities by pledging the credit of the house, so far as he _could_
pledge it without exciting suspicion of the truth. This done, there were
actually left, between that time and Christmas, liabilities to be met to
the extent of forty thousand pounds, without a farthing in hand to pay
that formidable debt.

After working through the night, this was the conclusion at which
Richard Turlington arrived, when the rising sun looked in at him through
the windows of his private room.

The whole force of the blow had fallen on _him_. The share of his
partners in the business was of the most trifling nature. The capital
was his, the risk was his. Personally and privately, _he_ had to find
the money, or to confront the one other alternative--ruin.

How was the money to be found?

With his position in the City, he had only to go to the famous
money-lending and discounting house of Bulpit Brothers--reported to
"turn over" millions in their business every year--and to supply himself
at once with the necessary funds. Forty thousand pounds was a trifling
transaction to Bulpit Brothers.

Having got the money, how, in the present state of his trade, was the
loan to be paid back?

His thoughts reverted to his marriage with Natalie.

"Curious!" he said to himself, recalling his conversation with Sir
Joseph on board the yacht. "Graybrooke told me he would give his
daughter half his fortune on her marriage. Half Graybrooke's fortune
happens to be just forty thousand pounds!" He took a turn in the room.
No! It was impossible to apply to Sir Joseph. Once shake Sir Joseph's
conviction of his commercial solidity, and the marriage would be
certainly deferred--if not absolutely broken off. Sir Joseph's fortune
could be made available, in the present emergency, in but one way--he
might use it to repay his debt. He had only to make the date at which
the loan expired coincide with the date of his marriage, and there
was his father-in-law's money at his disposal, or at his wife's
disposal--which meant the same thing. "It's well I pressed Graybrooke
about the marriage when I did!" he thought. "I can borrow the money at a
short date. In three months from this Natalie will be my wife."

He drove to his club to get breakfast, with his mind cleared, for the
time being, of all its anxieties but one.

Knowing where he could procure the loan, he was by no means equally sure
of being able to find the security on which he could borrow the
money. Living up to his income; having no expectations from any living
creature; possessing in landed property only some thirty or forty
acres in Somersetshire, with a quaint little dwelling, half farm house,
half-cottage, attached--he was incapable of providing the needful
security from his own personal resources. To appeal to wealthy friends
in the City would be to let those friends into the secret of his
embarrassments, and to put his credit in peril. He finished his
breakfast, and went back to Austin Friars--failing entirely, so far, to
see how he was to remove the last obstacle now left in his way.

The doors were open to the public; business had begun. He had not been
ten minutes in his room before the shipping-clerk knocked at the door
and interrupted him, still absorbed in his own anxious thoughts.

"What is it?" he asked, irritably.

"Duplicate Bills of Lading, sir," answered the clerk, placing the
documents on his ma ster's table.

Found! There was the security on his writing-desk, staring him in the
face! He dismissed the clerk and examined the papers.

They contained an account of goods shipped to the London house on board
vessels sailing from Smyrna and Odessa, and they were signed by the
masters of the ships, who thereby acknowledged the receipt of the goods,
and undertook to deliver them safely to the persons owning them, as
directed. First copies of these papers had already been placed in the
possession of the London house. The duplicates had now followed, in
case of accident. Richard Turlington instantly determined to make the
duplicates serve as his security, keeping the first copies privately
under lock and key, to be used in obtaining possession of the goods
at the customary time. The fraud was a fraud in appearance only. The
security was a pure formality. His marriage would supply him with the
funds needed for repaying the money, and the profits of his business
would provide, in course of time, for restoring the dowry of his wife.
It was simply a question of preserving his credit by means which were
legitimately at his disposal. Within the lax limits of mercantile
morality, Richard Turlington had a conscience. He put on his hat and
took his false security to the money-lenders, without feeling at all
lowered in his own estimation as an honest man.

Bulpit Brothers, long desirous of having such a name as his on their
books, received him with open arms. The security (covering the amount
borrowed) was accepted as a matter of course. The money was lent, for
three months, with a stroke of the pen. Turlington stepped out again
into the street, and confronted the City of London in the character of
the noblest work of mercantile creation--a solvent man.*

The Fallen Angel, walking invisibly behind, in Richard's shadow, flapped
his crippled wings in triumph. From that moment the Fallen Angel had got
him.

     * It may not be amiss to remind the incredulous reader that
     a famous firm in the City accepted precisely the same
     security as that here accepted by Bulpit Brothers, with the
     same sublime indifference to troubling themselves by making
     any inquiry about it.




FOURTH SCENE.

Muswell Hill.

The next day Turlington drove to the suburbs, on the chance of finding
the Graybrookes at home again. Sir Joseph disliked London, and could
not prevail on himself to live any nearer to the metropolis than Muswell
Hill. When Natalie wanted a change, and languished for balls, theaters,
flower-shows, and the like, she had a room especially reserved for her
in the house of Sir Joseph's married sister, Mrs. Sancroft, living in
that central deep of the fashionable whirlpool known among mortals as
Berkeley Square.

On his way through the streets, Turlington encountered a plain proof
that the Graybrookes must have returned. He was passed by Launce,
driving, in company with a gentleman, in a cab. The gentleman was
Launce's brother, and the two were on their way to the Commissioners
of Police to make the necessary arrangements for instituting an inquiry
into Turlington's early life.

Arrived at the gate of the villa, the information received only
partially fulfilled the visitor's expectations. The family had returned
on the previous evening. Sir Joseph and his sister were at home, but
Natalie was away again already. She had driven into town to lunch with
her aunt. Turlington went into the house.

"Have you lost any money?" Those were the first words uttered by Sir
Joseph when he and Richard met again, after the parting on board the
yacht.

"Not a farthing. I might have lost seriously, if I had not got back in
time to set things straight. Stupidity on the part of my people left in
charge--nothing more. It's all right now."

Sir Joseph lifted his eyes, with heartfelt devotion, to the ceiling.
"Thank God, Richard!" he said, in tones of the deepest feeling. He rang
the bell. "Tell Miss Graybrooke Mr. Turlington is here." He turned again
to Richard. "Lavinia is like me--Lavinia has been so anxious about you.
We have both of us passed a sleepless night." Miss Lavinia came in. Sir
Joseph hurried to meet her, and took her affectionately by both hands.
"My dear! the best of all good news, Richard has not lost a farthing."
Miss Lavinia lifted _her_ eyes to the ceiling with heartfelt devotion,
and said, "Thank God, Richard!"--like the echo of her brother's voice;
a little late, perhaps, for its reputation as an echo, but accurate to
half a note in its perfect repetition of sound.

Turlington asked the question which it had been his one object to put in
paying his visit to Muswell Hill.

"Have you spoken to Natalie?"

"This morning," replied Sir Joseph. "An opportunity offered itself after
breakfast. I took advantage of it, Richard--you shall hear how."

He settled himself in his chair for one of his interminable stories; he
began his opening sentence--and stopped, struck dumb at the first
word. There was an unexpected obstacle in the way--his sister was not
attending to him; his sister had silenced him at starting. The story
touching, this time, on the question of marriage, Miss Lavinia had her
woman's interest in seeing full justice done to the subject. She seized
on her brother's narrative as on property in her own right.

"Joseph should have told you," she began, addressing herself to
Turlington, "that our dear girl was unusually depressed in spirits this
morning. Quite in the right frame of mind for a little serious talk
about her future life. She ate nothing at breakfast, poor child, but a
morsel of dry toast."

"And marmalade," said Sir Joseph, striking in at the first opportunity.
The story, on this occasion, being Miss Lavinia's story, the polite
contradictions necessary to its successful progress were naturally
transferred from the sister to the brother, and became contradictions on
Sir Joseph's side.

"No," said Miss Lavinia, gently, "if you _will_ have it, Joseph--jam."

"I beg your pardon," persisted Sir Joseph; "marmalade."

"What _does_ it matter, brother?"

"Sister! the late great and good Doctor Johnson said accuracy ought
always to be studied even in the most trifling things."

"You _will_ have your way, Joseph--"(this was the formula--answering
to Sir Joseph's 'Let us waive the point'--which Miss Lavinia used, as
a means of conciliating her brother, and getting a fresh start for her
story). "Well, we took dear Natalie out between us, after breakfast,
for a little walk in the grounds. My brother opened the subject with
infinite delicacy and tact. 'Circumstances,' he said, 'into which it was
not then necessary to enter, made it very desirable, young as she was,
to begin to think of her establishment in life.' And then he referred,
Richard (so nicely), to your faithful and devoted attachment--"

"Excuse me, Lavinia. I began with Richard's attachment, and then I got
on to her establishment in life."

"Excuse _me_, Joseph. You managed it much more delicately than you
suppose. You didn't drag Richard in by the head and shoulders in that
way."

"Lavinia! I began with Richard."

"Joseph! your memory deceives you."

Turlington's impatience broke through all restraint.

"How did it end?" he asked. "Did you propose to her that we should be
married in the first week of the New Year?"

"Yes!" said Miss Lavinia.

"No!" said Sir Joseph.

The sister looked at the brother with an expression of affectionate
surprise. The brother looked at the sister with a fund of amiable
contradiction, expressed in a low bow.

"Do you really mean to deny, Joseph, that you told Natalie we had
decided on the first week in the New Year?"

"I deny the New Year, Lavinia. I said early in January."

"You _will_ have your way, Joseph! We were walking in the shrubbery at
the time. I had our dear girl's arm in mine, and I felt it tremble.
She suddenly stopped. 'Oh,' she said, 'not so soon!' I said, 'My dear,
consider Richard!' She turned to her father. She said, 'Don't, pray
don't press it so soon, papa! I respect Richard; I like Richard as your
true and faithful friend; but I don't love him as I ought to love him
if I am to be his wife.' Imagine her talking in that way! What could she
possibly know about it? Of course we both laughed--"

"_you_ laughed, Lavinia."

"_you_ laughed, Joseph."

"Get on, for God's sake!" cried Turlington, striking his hand
passionately on the table by which he was sitting. "Don't madden me by
contradicting each other! Did she give way or not?"

Miss Lavinia turned to her brother. "Contradicting each other, Joseph!"
she exclaimed, lifting her hands in blank amazement.

"Contradicting each other!" repeated Sir Joseph, equally astonished on
his side. "My dear Richard, what can you be thinking of? I contradict my
sister! We never disagreed in our lives."

"I contradict my brother! We have never had a cross word between us from
the time when we were children."

Turlington internally cursed his own irritable temper.

"I beg your pardon--both of you," he said. "I didn't know what I was
saying. Make some allowance for me. All my hopes in life are centered in
Natalie; and you have just told me (in her own words, Miss Lavinia) that
she doesn't love. You don't mean any harm, I dare say; but you cut me to
the heart."

This confession, and the look that accompanied it, touched the ready
sympathies of the two old people in the right place. The remainder of
the story dropped between them by common consent. They vied with each
other in saying the comforting words which would allay their dear
Richard's anxiety. How little he knew of young girls. How could he be
so foolish, poor fellow! as to attach any serious importance to what
Natalie had said? As if a young creature in her teens knew the state of
her own heart! Protestations and entreaties were matters of course, in
such cases. Tears even might be confidently expected from a right-minded
girl. It had all ended exactly as Richard would have wished it to end.
Sir Joseph had said, "My child! this is a matter of experience; love
will come when you are married." And Miss Lavinia had added, "Dear
Natalie, if you remembered your poor mother as I remember her, you would
know that your father's experience is to be relied on." In that way they
had put it to her; and she had hung her head and had given--all that
maiden modesty could be expected to give--a silent consent. "The
wedding-day was fixed for the first week in the New Year." ("No, Joseph;
not January--the New Year.") "And God bless you, Richard! and may your
married life be a long and happy one."

So the average ignorance of human nature, and the average belief in
conventional sentiment, complacently contemplated the sacrifice of one
more victim on the all-devouring altar of Marriage! So Sir Joseph and
his sister provided Launcelot Linzie with the one argument which he
wanted to convince Natalie: "Choose between making the misery of
your life by marrying _him_, and making the happiness of your life by
marrying _me._"

"When shall I see her?" asked Turlington, with Miss Lavinia (in tears
which did _her_ credit) in possession of one of his hands, and Sir
Joseph (in tears which did _him_ credit) in possession of the other.

"She will be back to dinner, dear Richard. Stay and dine."

"Thank you. I must go into the City first. I will come back and dine."

With that arrangement in prospect, he left them.

An hour later a telegram arrived from Natalie. She had consented to
dine, as well as lunch, in Berkeley Square--sleeping there that night,
and returning the next morning. Her father instantly telegraphed back
by the messenger, insisting on Natalie's return to Muswell Hill that
evening, in time to meet Richard Turlington at dinner.

"Quite right. Joseph," said Miss Lavinia, looking over her brother's
shoulder, while he wrote the telegram.

"She is showing a disposition to coquet with Richard," rejoined Sir
Joseph, with the air of a man who knew female human nature in its
remotest corners. "My telegram, Lavinia, will have its effect."

Sir Joseph was quite right. His telegram _had_ its effect. It not only
brought his daughter back to dinner--it produced another result which
his prophetic faculty had altogether failed to foresee.

The message reached Berkeley Square at five o'clock in the afternoon.
Let us follow the message.




FIFTH SCENE.

The Square.

Between four and five in the afternoon--when the women of the Western
regions are in their carriages, and the men are at their clubs--London
presents few places more conveniently adapted for purposes of private
talk than the solitary garden inclosure of a square.

On the day when Richard Turlington paid his visit to Muswell Hill, two
ladies (with a secret between them) unlocked the gate of the railed
garden in Berkeley Square. They shut the gate after entering the
inclosure, but carefully forbore to lock it as well, and carefully
restricted their walk to the westward side of the garden. One of them
was Natalie Graybrooke. The other was Mrs. Sancroft's eldest daughter.
A certain temporary interest attached, in the estimation of society,
to this young lady. She had sold well in the marriage market. In other
words, she had recently been raised to the position of Lord Winwood's
second wife; his lordship conferring on the bride not only the honors of
the peerage, but the additional distinction of being stepmother to his
three single daughters, all older than herself. In person, Lady Winwood
was little and fair. In character, she was dashing and resolute--a
complete contrast to Natalie, and (on that very account) Natalie's bosom
friend.

"My dear, one ambitious marriage in the family is quite enough! I have
made up my mind that _you_ shall marry the man you love. Don't tell me
your courage is failing you--the excuse is contemptible; I decline to
receive it. Natalie! the men have a phrase which exactly describes your
character. You want back-bone!"

The bonnet of the lady who expressed herself in these peremptory terms
barely reached the height of Natalie's shoulder. Natalie might have
blown the little airy, light-haired, unsubstantial creature over the
railings of the garden if she had taken a good long breath and stooped
low enough. But who ever met with a tall woman who had a will of her
own? Natalie's languid brown eyes looked softly down in submissive
attention from an elevation of five feet seven. Lady Winwood's brisk
blue eyes looked brightly up in despotic command from an elevation of
four feet eleven (in her shoes).

"You are trifling with Mr. Linzie, my dear. Mr. Linzie is a nice fellow.
I like him. I won't have that."

"Louisa!"

"Mr. Turlington has nothing to recommend him. He is not a well-bred old
gentleman of exalted rank. He is only an odious brute who happens to
have made money. You shall _not_ marry Mr. Turlington. And you _shall_
marry Launcelot Linzie."

"Will you let me speak, Louisa?"

"I will let you answer--nothing more. Didn't you come crying to me this
morning? Didn't you say, 'Louisa, they have pronounced sentence on me!
I am to be married in the first week of the New Year. Help me out of it,
for Heaven's sake!' You said all that, and more. And what did I do when
I heard your story?"

"Oh, you were so kind--"

"Kind doesn't half express it. I have committed crimes on your account.
I have deceived my husband and my mother. For your sake I got mamma to
ask Mr. Linzie to lunch (as _my_ friend!). For your sake I have banished
my unoffending husband, not an hour since, to his club. You wretched
girl, who arranged a private conference in the library? Who sent Mr.
Linzie off to consult his friend in the Temple on the law of clandestine
marriage? Who suggested your telegraphing home, and stopping here for
the night? Who made an appointment to meet your young man privately in
this detestable place in ten minutes' time? I did! I did! I did! All in
your interests. All to prevent you from doing what I have done--marrying
to please your family instead of to please yourself. (I don't complain,
mind, of Lord Winwood, or of his daughters. _He_ is charming; his
daughters I shall tame in course of time. You are different. And Mr.
Turlington, as I observed before, is a brute.) Very well. Now what do
you owe me on your side? You owe it to me at least to know your own
mind. You don't know it. You coolly inform me that you daren't run
the risk after all, and that you can't face the consequences on second
thoughts. I'll tell you what! You don't deserve that nice fellow, who
worships the very ground you tread on. You are a bread-and-butter miss.
I don't believe you are fond of him!"

"Not fond of him!" Natalie stopped, and clasped her hands in despair of
finding language strong enough for the occasion. At the same moment the
sound of a closing gate caught her ear. She looked round. Launce had
kept his appointment before his time. Launce was in the garden, rapidly
approaching them.

"Now for the Law of Clandestine Marriage!" said Lady Winwood. "Mr.
Linzie, we will take it sitting." She led the way to one of the benches
in the garden, and placed Launce between Natalie and herself. "Well,
Chief Conspirator, have you got the License? No? Does it cost too much?
Can I lend you the money?"

"It costs perjury, Lady Winwood, in my case," said Launce. "Natalie is
not of age. I can only get a License by taking my oath that I marry her
with her father's consent." He turned piteously to Natalie. "I couldn't
very well do that," he said, in the tone of a man who feels bound to
make an apology, "could I?" Natalie shuddered; Lady Winwood shrugged her
shoulders.

"In your place a woman wouldn't have hesitated," her ladyship remarked.
"But men are so selfish. Well! I suppose there is some other way?"

"Yes, there is another way," said Launce. "But there is a horrid
condition attached to it--"

"Something worse than perjury, Mr. Linzie? Murder?"

"I'll tell you directly, Lady Winwood. The marriage comes first. The
condition follows. There is only one chance for us. We must be married
by banns."

"Banns!" cried Natalie. "Why, banns are publicly proclaimed in church!"

"They needn't be proclaimed in _your_ church, you goose," said Lady
Winwood. "And, even if they were, nobody would be the wiser. You may
trust implicitly, my dear, in the elocution of an English clergyman!"

"That's just what my friend said," cried Launce. "'Take a lodging near
a large parish church, in a remote part of London'--(this is my friend's
advice)--'go to the clerk, tell him you want to be married by banns, and
say you belong to that parish. As for the lady, in your place I should
simplify it. I should say she belonged to the parish too. Give an
address, and have some one there to answer questions. How is the
clerk to know? He isn't likely to be over-anxious about it--his fee is
eighteen-pence. The clerk makes his profit out of you, after you are
married. The same rule applies to the parson. He will have your names
supplied to him on a strip of paper, with dozens of other names; and he
will read them out all together in one inarticulate jumble in church.
You will stand at the altar when your time comes, with Brown and Jones,
Nokes and Styles, Jack and Gill. All that you will have to do is, to
take care that your young lady doesn't fall to Jack, and you to Gill,
by mistake--and there you are, married by banns.' My friend's opinion,
stated in his own words."

Natalie sighed, and wrung her hands in her lap. "We shall never get
through it," she said, despondingly.

Lady Winwood took a more cheerful view.

"I see nothing very formidable as yet, my dear. But we have still to
hear the end of it. You mentioned a condition just now, Mr. Linzie.

"I am coming to the condition, Lady Winwood. You naturally suppose, as
I did, that I put Natalie into a cab, and run away with her from the
church door?"

"Certainly. And I throw an old shoe after you for luck, and go home
again."

Launce shook his head ominously.

"Natalie must go home again as well as you!"

Lady Winwood started. "Is that the condition you mentioned just now?"
she asked.

"That is the condition. I may marry her without anything serious coming
of it. But, if I run away with her afterward, and if you are there,
aiding and abetting me, we are guilty of Abduction, and we may stand,
side by side, at the bar of the Old Bailey to answer for it!"

Natalie sprang to her feet in horror. Lady Winwood held up one finger
warningly, signing to her to let Launce go on.

"Natalie is not yet sixteen years old," Launce proceeded. "She must go
straight back to her father's house from the church, and I must wait
to run away with her till her next birthday. When she's turned sixteen,
she's ripe for elopement--not an hour before. There is the law of
Abduction! Despotism in a free country--that's what I call it!"

Natalie sat down again, with an air of relief.

"It's a very comforting law, I think," she said. "It doesn't force one
to take the dreadful step of running away from home all at once. It
gives one time to consider, and plan, and make up one's mind. I can tell
you this, Launce, if I am to be persuaded into marrying you, the law of
Abduction is the only thing that will induce me to do it. You ought to
thank the law, instead of abusing it."

Launce listened--without conviction.

"It's a pleasant prospect," he said, "to part at the church door, and to
treat my own wife on the footing of a young lady who is engaged to marry
another gentleman."

"Is it any pleasanter for _me_," retorted Natalie, "to have Richard
Turlington courting me, when I am all the time your wife? I shall never
be able to do it. I wish I was dead!"

"Come! come!" interposed Lady Winwood. "It's time to be serious.
Natalie's birthday, Mr. Linzie, is next Christmas-day. She will be
sixteen--"

"At seven in the morning," said Launce; "I got that out of Sir Joseph.
At one minute past seven, Greenwich mean time, we may be off together. I
got _that_ out of the lawyer."

"And it isn't an eternity to wait from now till Christmas-day. You get
that, by way of completing the list of your acquisitions, out of
_me_. In the mean time, can you, or can you not, manage to meet the
difficulties in the way of the marriage?"

"I have settled everything," Launce answered, confidently. "There is not
a single difficulty left."

He turned to Natalie, listening to him in amazement, and explained
himself. It had struck him that he might appeal--with his purse in
his hand, of course--to the interest felt in his affairs by the late
stewardess of the yacht. That excellent woman had volunteered to do all
that she could to help him. Her husband had obtained situations for his
wife and himself on board another yacht--and they were both eager
to assist in any conspiracy in which their late merciless master was
destined to play the part of victim. When on shore, they lived in
a populous London parish, far away from the fashionable district of
Berkeley Square, and further yet from the respectable suburb of Muswell
Hill. A room in the house could be nominally engaged for Natalie, in the
assumed character of the stewardess's niece--the stewardess undertaking
to answer any purely formal questions which might be put by the church
authorities, and to be present at the marriage ceremony. As for Launce,
he would actually, as well as nominally, live in the district close by;
and the steward, if needful, would answer for _him_. Natalie might call
at her parochial residence occasionally, under the wing of Lady Winwood;
gaining leave of absence from Muswell Hill, on the plea of paying one of
her customary visits at her aunt's house. The conspiracy, in brief, was
arranged in all its details. Nothing was now wanting but the consent of
the young lady; obtaining which, Launce would go to the parish church
and give the necessary notice of a marriage by banns on the next day.
There was the plot. What did the ladies think of it?

Lady Winwood thought it perfect.

Natalie was not so easily satisfied.

"My father has always been so kind to me!" she said. "The one thing
I can't get over, Launce, is distressing papa. If he had been hard on
me--as some fathers are--I shouldn't mind." She suddenly brightened, as
if she saw her position in a new light. "Why should you hurry me?" she
asked. "I am going to dine at my aunt's to-day, and you are coming in
the evening. Give me time! Wait till to-night."

Launce instantly entered his protest against wasting a moment longer.
Lady Winwood opened her lips to support him. They were both silenced at
the same moment by the appearance of one of Mrs. Sancroft's servants,
opening the gate of the square.

Lady Winwood went forward to meet the man. A suspicion crossed her mind
that he might be bringing bad news.

"What do you want?" she asked.

"I beg your pardon, my lady--the housekeeper said you were walking here
with Miss Graybrooke. A telegram for Miss Graybrooke."

Lady Winwood took the telegram from the man's hand; dismissed him, and
went back with it to Natalie. Natalie opened it nervously. She read
the message--and instantly changed. Her cheeks flushed deep; her eyes
flashed with indignation. "Even papa can be hard on me, it seems, when
Richard asks him!" she exclaimed. She handed the telegram to Launce. Her
eyes suddenly filled with tears. "_You_ love me," she said, gently--and
stopped. "Marry me!" she added, with a sudden burst of resolution. "I'll
risk it!"

As she spoke those words, Lady Winwood read the telegram. It ran thus:

"Sir Joseph Graybrooke, Muswell Hill. To Miss Natalie Graybrooke;
Berkeley Square. Come back immediately. You are engaged to dine here
with Richard Turlington."

Lady Winwood folded up the telegram with a malicious smile. "Well
done, Sir Joseph!" thought her ladyship. "We might never have persuaded
Natalie--but for You!"




SIXTH SCENE.

The Church.

The time is morning; the date is early in the month of November. The
place is a church, in a poor and populous parish in the undiscovered
regions of London, eastward of the Tower, and hard by the river-side.

A marriage procession of five approaches the altar The bridegroom
is pale, and the bride is frightened. The bride's friend (a
resolute-looking little lady) encourages her in whispers. The two
respectable persons, apparently man and wife, who complete the
procession, seem to be not quite clear as to the position which they
occupy at the ceremony. The beadle, as he marshals them before the
altar, sees something under the surface in this wedding-party. Marriages
in the lower ranks of life are the only marriages celebrated here. Is
this a runaway match? The beadle anticipates something out of the common
in the shape of a fee.

The clergyman (the junior curate) appears from the vestry in his robes.
The clerk takes his place. The clergyman's eye rests with a sudden
interest and curiosity on the bride and bridegroom, and on the bride's
friend; notices the absence of elderly relatives; remarks, in the
two ladies especially, evidences of refinement and breeding entirely
unparalleled in his professional experience of brides and brides'
friends standing before the altar of that church; questions, silently
and quickly, the eye of the clerk, occupied also in observing the
strangers with interest "Jenkinson" (the clergyman's look asks), "is
this all right?" "Sir" (the clerk's look answers), "a marriage by banns;
all the formalities have been observed." The clergyman opens his book.
The formalities have been observed; his duty lies plainly before him.
Attention, Launcelot! Courage, Natalie! The service begins.

Launce casts a last furtive look round the church. Will Sir Joseph
Graybrooke start up and stop it from one of the empty pews? Is Richard
Turlington lurking in the organ-loft, and only waiting till the words of
the service appeal to him to prohibit the marriage, or "else hereafter
forever to hold his peace?" No. The clergyman proceeds steadily,
and nothing happens. Natalie's charming face grows paler and paler,
Natalie's heart throbs faster and faster, as the time comes nearer for
reading the words which unite them for life. Lady Winwood herself feels
an unaccustomed fluttering in the region of the bosom. Her ladyship's
thoughts revert, not altogether pleasantly, to her own marriage: "Ah
me! what was I thinking of when I was in this position? Of the bride's
beautiful dress, and of Lady Winwood's coming presentation at court!"

The service advances to the words in which they plight their troth.
Launce has put the ring on her finger. Launce has repeated the words
after the clergyman. Launce has married her! Done! Come what may of it,
done!

The service ends. Bridegroom, bride, and witnesses go into the vestry
to sign the book. The signing, like the service, is serious. No trifling
with the truth is possible here. When it comes to Lady Winwood's turn,
Lady Winwood must write her name. She does it, but without her usual
grace and decision. She drops her handkerchief. The clerk picks it up
for her, and notices that a coronet is embroidered in one corner.

The fees are paid. They leave the vestry. Other couples, when it is
over, are talkative and happy. These two are more silent and more
embarrassed than ever. Stranger still, while other couples go off with
relatives and friends, all socially united in honor of the occasion,
these two and their friends part at the church door. The respectable man
and his wife go their way on foot. The little lady with the coronet on
her handkerchief puts the bride into a cab, gets in herself, and directs
the driver to close the door, while the bridegroom is standing on the
church steps! The bridegroom's face is clouded, as well it may be. He
puts his head in at the window of the cab; he possesses himself of the
bride's hand; he speaks in a whisper; he is apparently not to be shaken
off. The little lady exerts her authority, separates the clasped hands,
pushes the bridegroom away, and cries peremptorily to the driver to go
on. The cab starts; the deserted husband drifts desolately anyhow down
the street. The clerk, who has seen it all, goes back to the vestry and
reports what has happened.

The rector (with his wife on his arm) has just dropped into the vestry
on business in passing. He and the curate are talking about the strange
marriage. The rector, gravely bent on ascertaining that no blame rests
with the church, interrogates, and is satisfied. The rector's wife is
not so easy to deal with. She has looked at the signatures in the book.
One of the names is familiar to her. She cross-examines the clerk as
soon as her husband is done with him. When she hears of the coronet on
the handkerchief she points to the signature of "Louisa Winwood," and
says to the rector, "I know who it is! Lord Winwood's second wife. I
went to school with his lordship's daughters by his first marriage. We
occasionally meet at the Sacred Concerts (on the 'Ladies' Committee');
I shall find an opportunity of speaking to them. One moment, Mr.
Jenkinson, I will write down the names before you put away the book.
'Launcelot Linzie,' 'Natalie Graybrooke.' Very pretty names; quite
romantic. I do delight in a romance. Good-morning."

She gives the curate a parting smile, and the clerk a parting nod, and
sails out of the vestry. Natalie, silently returning in Lady Winwood's
company to Muswell Hill; and Launce, cursing the law of Abduction as he
roams the streets--little think that the ground is already mined under
their feet. Richard Turlington may hear of it now, or may hear of
it later. The discovery of the marriage depends entirely on a chance
meeting between the lord's daughters and the rector's wife.




SEVENTH SCENE.

The Evening Party.


---------------------------------------------------- MR. TURLINGTON,

LADY WINWOOD At Home.

Wednesday, December 15th.--Ten o'clock.
----------------------------------------------------

"Dearest Natalie--As the brute insists, the brute must have the
invitation which I inclose. Never mind, my child. You and Launce are
coming to dinner, and I will see that you have your little private
opportunities of retirement afterward. All I expect of you in return is,
_not_ to look (when you come back) as if your husband had been kissing
you. You will certainly let out the secret of those stolen kisses, if
you don't take care. At mamma's dinner yesterday, your color (when you
came out of the conservatory) was a sight to see. Even your shoulders
were red! They are charming shoulders, I know, and men take the
strangest fancies sometimes. But, my dear, suppose you wear a chemisette
next time, if you haven't authority enough over him to prevent his doing
it again!

"Your affectionate LOUISA."

The private history of the days that had passed since the marriage was
written in that letter. An additional chapter--of some importance in its
bearing on the future--was contributed by the progress of events at Lady
Winwood's party.

By previous arrangement with Natalie, the Graybrookes (invited to
dinner) arrived early. Leaving her husband and her stepdaughters to
entertain Sir Joseph and Miss Lavinia, Lady Winwood took Natalie into
her own boudoir, which communicated by a curtained opening with the
drawing-room.

"My dear, you are looking positively haggard this evening. Has anything
happened?"

"I am nearly worn out, Louisa. The life I am leading is so unendurable
that, if Launce pressed me, I believe I should consent to run away with
him when we leave your house tonight."

"You will do nothing of the sort, if you please. Wait till you are
sixteen. I delight in novelty, but the novelty of appearing at the Old
Bailey is beyond my ambition. Is the brute coming to-night?"

"Of course. He insists on following me wherever I go. He lunched at
Muswell Hill today. More complaints of my incomprehensible coldness to
him. Another scolding from papa. A furious letter from Launce. If I
let Richard kiss my hand again in his presence, Launce warns me he will
knock him down. Oh, the meanness and the guiltiness of the life I am
leading now! I am in the falsest of all false positions, Louisa, and you
encouraged me to do it. I believe Richard Turlington suspects us. The
last two times Launce and I tried to get a minute together at my aunt's,
he contrived to put himself in our way. There he was, my dear, with
his scowling face, looking as if he longed to kill Launce. Can you do
anything for us tonight? Not on my account. But Launce is so impatient.
If he can't say two words to me alone this evening, he declares he will
come to Muswell Hill, and catch me in the garden tomorrow."

"Compose yourself, my dear; he shall say his two words to-night."

"How?"

Lady Winwood pointed through the curtained entrance of the boudoir to
the door of the drawing-room. Beyond the door was the staircase landing.
And beyond the landing was a second drawing-room, the smaller of the
two.

"There are only three or four people coming to dinner," her ladyship
proceeded; "and a few more in the evening. Being a small party, the
small drawing-room will do for us. This drawing-room will not be
lighted, and there will be only my reading-lamp here in the boudoir. I
shall give the signal for leaving the dining-room earlier than usual.
Launce will join us before the evening party begins. The moment he
appears, send him in here--boldly before your aunt and all of us."

"For what?"

"For your fan. Leave it there under the sofa-cushion before we go down
to dinner. You will sit next to Launce, and you will give him private
instructions not to find the fan. You will get impatient--you will go to
find it yourself--and there you are. Take care of your shoulders, Mrs.
Linzie! I have nothing more to say."

The guests asked to dinner began to arrive. Lady Winwood was recalled to
her duties as mistress of the house.

It was a pleasant little dinner--with one drawback. It began too late.
The ladies only reached the small drawing-room at ten minutes to ten.
Launce was only able to join them as the clock struck.

"Too late!" whispered Natalie. "He will be here directly."

"Nobody comes punctually to an evening party," said Launce. "Don't let
us lose a moment. Send me for your fan."

Natalie opened her lips to say the necessary words. Before she could
speak, the servant announced--"Mr. Turlington."

He came in, with his stiffly-upright shirt collar and his
loosely-fitting glossy black clothes. He made his sullen and clumsy
bow to Lady Winwood. And then he did, what he had done dozens of times
already--he caught Natalie, with her eyes still bright and her face
still animated (after talking to Launce)--a striking contrast to the
cold and unimpulsive young lady whom he was accustomed to see while
Natalie was talking to _him_.

Lord Winwood's daughters were persons of some celebrity in the world of
amateur music. Noticing the look that Turlington cast at Launce, Lady
Winwood whispered to Miss Lavinia--who instantly asked the young ladies
to sing. Launce, in obedience to a sign from Natalie, volunteered to
find the music-books. It is needless to add that he pitched on the wrong
volume at starting. As he lifted it from the piano to take it back to
the stand, there dropped out from between the leaves a printed letter,
looking like a circular. One of the young ladies took it up, and ran her
eye over it, with a start.

"The Sacred Concerts!" she exclaimed.

Her two sisters, standing by, looked at each other guiltily: "What will
the Committee say to us? We entirely forgot the meeting last month."

"Is there a meeting this month?"

They all looked anxiously at the printed letter.

"Yes! The twenty-third of December. Put it down in your book, Amelia."
Amelia, then and there, put it down among the engagements for the latter
end of the month. And Natalie's unacknowledged husband placidly looked
on.

So did the merciless irony of circumstances make Launce the innocent
means of exposing his own secret to discovery. Thanks to his success
in laying his hand on the wrong music-book, there would now be a
meeting--two good days before the elopement could take place--between
the lord's daughters and the rector's wife!

The guests of the evening began to appear by twos and threes. The
gentlemen below stairs left the dinner-table, and joined them.

The small drawing-room was pleasantly filled, and no more. Sir Joseph
Graybrooke, taking Turlington's hand, led him eagerly to their host.
The talk in the dining-room had turned on finance. Lord Winwood was not
quite satisfied with some of his foreign investments; and Sir Joseph's
"dear Richard" was the very man to give him a little sound advice. The
three laid their heads together in a corner. Launce (watching them)
slyly pressed Natalie's hand. A renowned "virtuoso" had arrived, and
was thundering on the piano. The attention of the guests generally was
absorbed in the performance. A fairer chance of sending Launce for
the fan could not possibly have offered itself. While the financial
discussion was still proceeding, the married lovers were ensconced
together alone in the boudoir.

Lady Winwood (privately observant of their absence) kept her eye on the
corner, watching Richard Turlington.

He was talking earnestly--with his back toward the company. He neither
moved nor looked round. It came to Lord Winwood's turn to speak.
He preserved the same position, listening. Sir Joseph took up the
conversation next. Then his attention wandered--he knew beforehand what
Sir Joseph would say. His eyes turned anxiously toward the place in
which he had left Natalie. Lord Winwood said a word. His head turned
back again toward the corner. Sir Joseph put an objection. He glanced
once more over his shoulder--this time at the place in which Launce had
been standing. The next moment his host recalled his attention, and made
it impossible for him to continue his scrutiny of the room. At the same
times two among the evening guests, bound for another party, approached
to take leave of the lady of the house. Lady Winwood was obliged to
rise, and attend to them. They had something to say to her before they
left, and they said it at terrible length, standing so as to intercept
her view of the proceedings of the enemy. When she had got rid of them
at last, she looked--and behold Lord Winwood and Sir Joseph were the
only occupants of the corner!

Delaying one moment, to set the "virtuoso" thundering once more, Lady
Winwood slipped out of the room and crossed the landing. At the
entrance to the empty drawing-room she heard Turlington's voice, low and
threatening, in the boudoir. Jealousy has a Second Sight of its own.
He had looked in the right place at starting--and, oh heavens! he had
caught them.

Her ladyship's courage was beyond dispute; but she turned pale as she
approached the entrance to the boudoir.

There stood Natalie--at once angry and afraid--between the man to
whom she was ostensibly engaged, and the man to whom she was actually
married. Turlington's rugged face expressed a martyrdom of suppressed
fury. Launce--in the act of offering Natalie her fan--smiled, with the
cool superiority of a man who knew that he had won his advantage, and
who triumphed in knowing it.

"I forbid you to take your fan from that man's hands," said Turlington,
speaking to Natalie, and pointing to Launce.

"Isn't it rather too soon to begin 'forbidding'?" asked Lady Winwood,
good-humoredly.

"Exactly what I say!" exclaimed Launce. "It seems necessary to remind
Mr. Turlington that he is not married to Natalie yet!"

Those last words were spoken in a tone which made both the women tremble
inwardly for results. Lady Winwood took the fan from Launce with one
hand, and took Natalie's arm with the other.

"There is your fan, my dear," she said, in her easy off-hand manner.
"Why do you allow these two barbarous men to keep you here while the
great Bootmann is playing the Nightmare Sonata in the next room? Launce!
Mr. Turlington! follow me, and learn to be musical directly! You have
only to shut your eyes, and you will fancy you hear four modern German
composers playing, instead of one, and not the ghost of a melody among
all the four." She led the way out with Natalie, and whispered, "Did he
catch you?" Natalie whispered back, "I heard him in time. He only caught
us looking for the fan." The two men waited behind to have two words
together alone in the boudoir.

"This doesn't end here, Mr. Linzie!"

Launce smiled satirically. "For once I agree with you," he answered. "It
doesn't end here, as you say."

Lady Winwood stopped, and looked back at them from the drawing-room
door. They were keeping her waiting--they had no choice but to follow
the mistress of the house.

Arrived in the next room, both Turlington and Launce resumed their
places among the guests with the same object in view. As a necessary
result of the scene in the boudoir, each had his own special
remonstrance to address to Sir Joseph. Even here, Launce was beforehand
with Turlington. He was the first to get possession of Sir Joseph's
private ear. His complaint took the form of a protest against
Turlington's jealousy, and an appeal for a reconsideration of the
sentence which excluded him from Muswell Hill. Watching them from
a distance, Turlington's suspicious eye detected the appearance of
something unduly confidential in the colloquy between the two. Under
cover of the company, he stole behind them and listened.

The great Bootmann had arrived at that part of the Nightmare Sonata in
which musical sound, produced principally with the left hand, is made to
describe, beyond all possibility of mistake, the rising of the moon in a
country church-yard and a dance of Vampires round a maiden's grave. Sir
Joseph, having no chance against the Vampires in a whisper, was obliged
to raise his voice to make himself audible in answering and comforting
Launce. "I sincerely sympathize with you," Turlington heard him say;
"and Natalie feels about it as I do. But Richard is an obstacle in our
way. We must look to the consequences, my dear boy, supposing Richard
found us out." He nodded kindly to his nephew; and, declining to pursue
the subject, moved away to another part of the room.

Turlington's jealous distrust, wrought to the highest pitch of
irritability for weeks past, instantly associated the words he had just
heard with the words spoken by Launce in the boudoir, which had reminded
him that he was not married to Natalie yet. Was there treachery at work
under the surface? and was the object to persuade weak Sir Joseph to
reconsider his daughter's contemplated marriage in a sense favorable
to Launce? Turlington's blind suspicion overleaped at a bound all the
manifest improbabilities which forbade such a conclusion as this. After
an instant's consideration with himself, he decided on keeping his own
counsel, and on putting Sir Joseph's good faith then and there to a test
which he could rely on as certain to take Natalie's father by surprise.

"Graybrooke!"

Sir Joseph started at the sight of his future son-in-law's face.

"My dear Richard, you are looking very strangely! Is the heat of the
room too much for you?"

"Never mind the heat! I have seen enough to-night to justify me in
insisting that your daughter and Launcelot Linzie shall meet no more
between this and the day of my marriage." Sir Joseph attempted to speak.
Turlington declined to give him the opportunity. "Yes! yes! your opinion
of Linzie isn't mine, I know. I saw you as thick as thieves together
just now." Sir Joseph once more attempted to make himself heard. Wearied
by Turlington's perpetual complaints of his daughter and his nephew, he
was sufficiently irritated by this time to have reported what Launce had
actually said to him if he had been allowed the chance. But Turlington
persisted in going on. "I cannot prevent Linzie from being received in
this house, and at your sister's," he said; "but I can keep him out of
_my_ house in the country, and to the country let us go. I propose a
change in the arrangements. Have you any engagement for the Christmas
holidays?"

He paused, and fixed his eyes attentively on Sir Joseph. Sir Joseph,
looking a little surprised, replied briefly that he had no engagement.

"In that case," resumed Turlington, "I invite you all to Somersetshire,
and I propose that the marriage shall take place from my house, and not
from yours. Do you refuse?"

"It is contrary to the usual course of proceeding in such cases,
Richard," Sir Joseph began.

"Do you refuse?" reiterated Turlington. "I tell you plainly, I shall
place a construction of my own upon your motive if you do."

"No, Richard," said Sir Joseph, quietly, "I accept."

Turlington drew back a step in silence. Sir Joseph had turned the tables
on him, and had taken _him_ by surprise.

"It will upset several plans, and be strongly objected to by the
ladies," proceeded the old gentleman. "But if nothing less will satisfy
you, I say, Yes! I shall have occasion, when we meet to-morrow at
Muswell Hill, to appeal to your indulgence under circumstances which may
greatly astonish you. The least I can do, in the meantime, is to set an
example of friendly sympathy and forbearance on my side. No more now,
Richard. Hush! the music!"

It was impossible to make him explain himself further that night.
Turlington was left to interpret Sir Joseph's mysterious communication
with such doubtful aid to success as his own unassisted ingenuity might
afford.

The meeting of the next day at Muswell Hill had for its object--as
Turlington had already been informed--the drawing of Natalie's
marriage-settlement. Was the question of money at the bottom of Sir
Joseph's contemplated appeal to his indulgence? He thought of his
commercial position. The depression in the Levant trade still continued.
Never had his business at any previous time required such constant
attention, and repaid that attention with so little profit. The Bills
of Lading had been already used by the firm, in the ordinary course of
trade, to obtain possession of the goods. The duplicates in the hands
of Bulpit Brothers were literally waste paper. Repayment of the loan
of forty thousand pounds (with interest) was due in less than a
month's time. There was his commercial position! Was it possible that
money-loving Sir Joseph had any modification to propose in the matter
of his daughter's dowry? The bare dread that it might be so struck him
cold. He quitted the house--and forgot to wish Natalie goodnight.

Meanwhile, Launce had left the evening party before him--and Launce
also found matter for serious reflection presented to his mind before he
slept that night. In other words, he found, on reaching his lodgings,
a letter from his brother marked "private." Had the inquiry into the
secrets of Turlington's early life--now prolonged over some weeks--led
to positive results at last? Launce eagerly opened the letter. It
contained a Report and a Summary. He passed at once to the Summary, and
read these words:

"If you only want moral evidence to satisfy your own mind, your end is
gained. There is, morally, no doubt that Turlington and the sea-captain
who cast the foreign sailor overboard to drown are on e and the same
man. Legally, the matter is beset by difficulties, Turlington having
destroyed all provable connection between his present self and his past
life. There is only one chance for us. A sailor on board the ship (who
was in his master's secrets) is supposed to be still living (under his
master's protection). All the black deeds of Turlington's early life are
known to this man. He can prove the facts, if we can find him, and make
it worth his while to speak. Under what alias he is hidden we do not
know. His own name is Thomas Wildfang. If we are to make the attempt to
find him, not a moment is to be lost. The expenses may be serious. Let
me know whether we are to go on, or whether enough has been done to
attain the end you have in view."

Enough had been done--not only to satisfy Launce, but to produce the
right effect on Sir Joseph's mind if Sir Joseph proved obdurate when the
secret of the marriage was revealed. Launce wrote a line directing the
stoppage of the proceedings at the point which they had now reached.
"Here is a reason for her not marrying Turlington," he said to himself,
as he placed the papers under lock and key. "And if she doesn't marry
Turlington," he added, with a lover's logic, "why shouldn't she marry
Me?"




EIGHTH SCENE.

The Library.

The next day Sir Joseph Graybrooke, Sir Joseph's lawyer, Mr. Dicas
(highly respectable and immensely rich), and Richard Turlington were
assembled in the library at Muswell Hill, to discuss the question of
Natalie's marriage settlement.

After the usual preliminary phrases had been exchanged, Sir Joseph
showed some hesitation in openly approaching the question which the
little party of three had met to debate. He avoided his lawyer's eye;
and he looked at Turlington rather uneasily.

"Richard," he began at last, "when I spoke to you about your marriage,
on board the yacht, I said I would give my daughter--" Either his
courage or his breath failed him at that point. He was obliged to wait a
moment before he could go on.

"I said I would give my daughter half my fortune on her marriage," he
resumed. "Forgive me, Richard. I can't do it!"

Mr. Dicas, waiting for his instructions, laid down his pen and looked at
Sir Joseph's son-in-law elect. What would Mr. Turlington say?

He said nothing. Sitting opposite the window, he rose when Sir Joseph
spoke, and placed himself at the other side of the table, with his back
to the light.

"My eyes are weak this morning," he said, in an unnaturally low tone of
voice. "The light hurts them."

He could find no more plausible excuse than that for concealing his face
in shadow from the scrutiny of the two men on either side of him. The
continuous moral irritation of his unhappy courtship--a courtship which
had never advanced beyond the frigid familiarity of kissing Natalie's
hand in the presence of others--had physically deteriorated him. Even
_his_ hardy nerves began to feel the long strain of suspicion that
had been laid unremittingly on them for weeks past. His power of
self-control--he knew it himself--was not to be relied on. He could hide
his face: he could no longer command it.

"Did you hear what I said, Richard?"

"I heard. Go on."

Sir Joseph proceeded, gathering confidence as he advanced.

"Half my fortune!" he repeated. "It's parting with half my life; it's
saying good-by forever to my dearest friend! My money has been such a
comfort to me, Richard; such a pleasant occupation for my mind. I know
no reading so interesting and so instructive as the reading of one's
Banker's Book. To watch the outgoings on one side," said Sir Joseph,
with a gentle and pathetic solemnity, "and the incomings on the
other--the sad lessening of the balance at one time, and the cheering
and delightful growth of it at another--what absorbing reading! The best
novel that ever was written isn't to be mentioned in a breath with it.
I can not, Richard, I really can _not_, see my nice round balance shrink
up to half the figure that I have been used to for a lifetime. It may
be weak of me," proceeded Sir Joseph, evidently feeling that it was not
weak of him at all, "but we all have our tender place, and my Banker's
Book is mine. Besides, it isn't as if you wanted it. If you wanted it,
of course--but you don't want it. You are a rich man; you are
marrying my dear Natalie for love, not for money. You and she and my
grandchildren will have it all at my death. It _can_ make no difference
to you to wait a few years till the old man's chair at the fireside
is empty. Will you say the fourth part, Richard, instead of the half?
Twenty thousand," pleaded Sir Joseph, piteously. "I can bear twenty
thousand off. For God's sake don't ask me for more!"

The lips of the lawyer twisted themselves sourly into an ironical smile.
He was quite as fond of his money as Sir Joseph. He ought to have felt
for his client; but rich men have no sympathy with one another. Mr.
Dicas openly despised Sir Joseph.

There was a pause. The robin-redbreasts in the shrubbery outside must
have had prodigious balances at their bankers; they hopped up on the
window-sill so fearlessly; they looked in with so little respect at the
two rich men.

"Don't keep me in suspense, Richard," proceeded Sir Joseph. "Speak out.
Is it yes or no?"

Turlington struck his hand excitedly on the table, and burst out on a
sudden with the answer which had been so strangely delayed.

"Twenty thousand with all my heart!" he said. "On this condition,
Graybrooke, that every farthing of it is settled on Natalie, and on her
children after her. Not a half-penny to me!" he cried magnanimously, in
his brassiest tones. "Not a half-penny to me!"

Let no man say the rich are heartless. Sir Joseph seized his
son-in-law's hand in silence, and burst into tears.

Mr. Dicas, habitually a silent man, uttered the first two words that had
escaped him since the business began. "Highly creditable," he said, and
took a note of his instructions on the spot.

From that point the business of the settlement flowed smoothly on to its
destined end. Sir Joseph explained his views at the fullest length, and
the lawyer's pen kept pace with him. Turlington, remaining in his
place at the table, restricted himself to a purely passive part in the
proceedings. He answered briefly when it was absolutely necessary to
speak, and he agreed with the two elders in everything. A man has no
attention to place at the disposal of other people when he stands at
a crisis in his life. Turlington stood at that crisis, at the trying
moment when Sir Joseph's unexpected proposal pressed instantly for a
reply. Two merciless alternatives confronted him. Either he must repay
the borrowed forty thousand pounds on the day when repayment was due,
or he must ask Bulpit Brothers to grant him an extension of time, and so
inevitably provoke an examination into the fraudulent security deposited
with the firm, which could end in but one way. His last, literally his
last chance, after Sir Joseph had diminished the promised dowry by one
half, was to adopt the high-minded tone which became his position, and
to conceal the truth until he could reveal it to his father-in-law in
the privileged character of Natalie's husband. "I owe forty thousand
pounds, sir, in a fortnight's time, and I have not got a farthing of
my own. Pay for me, or you will see your son-in-law's name in the
Bankrupt's List." For his daughter's sake--who could doubt it?--Sir
Joseph would produce the money. The one thing needful was to be married
in time. If either by accident or treachery Sir Joseph was led into
deferring the appointed day, by so much as a fortnight only, the fatal
"call" would come, and the firm of Pizzituti, Turlington & Branca would
appear in the Gazette.

So he reasoned, standing on the brink of the terrible discovery which
was soon to reveal to him that Natalie was the wife of another man.

"Richard!"

"Mr. Turlington!"

He started, and roused his attention to present things. Sir Joseph on
one side, and the lawyer on the other, were both appealing to him, and
both regarding him with looks of amazement.

"Have you done with the settlement?" he asked.

"My dear Richard, we have done with it long since," replied Sir Joseph.
"Have you really not heard what I have been saying for the last quarter
of an hour to good Mr. Dicas here? What _can_ you have been thinking
of?"

Turlington did not attempt to answer the question. "Am I interested," he
asked, "in what you have been saying to Mr. Dicas?"

"You shall judge for yourself," answered Sir Joseph, mysteriously; "I
have been giving Mr. Dicas his instructions for making my Will. I wish
the Will and the Marriage-Settlement to be executed at the same time.
Read the instructions, Mr. Dicas."

Sir Joseph's contemplated Will proved to have two merits--it was simple
and it was short. Excepting one or two trifling legacies to distant
relatives, he had no one to think of (Miss Lavinia being already
provided for) but his daughter and the children who might be born of her
marriage. In its various provisions, made with these two main objects
in view, the Will followed the precedents established in such cases.
It differed in no important respect from the tens of thousands of other
wills made under similar circumstances. Sir Joseph's motive in claiming
special attention for it still remained unexplained, when Mr. Dicas
reached the clause devoted to the appointment of executors and trustees;
and announced that this portion of the document was left in blank.

"Sir Joseph Graybrooke, are you prepared to name the persons whom you
appoint?" asked the lawyer.

Sir Joseph rose, apparently for the purpose of giving special importance
to the terms in which he answered his lawyer's question.

"I appoint," he said, "as sole executor and trustee--Richard
Turlington."

It was no easy matter to astonish Mr. Dicas. Sir Joseph's reply
absolutely confounded him. He looked across the table at his client and
delivered himself on this special occasion of as many as three words.

"Are you mad?" he asked.

Sir Joseph's healthy complexion slightly reddened. "I never was in more
complete possession of myself, Mr. Dicas, than at this moment."

Mr. Dicas was not to be silenced in that way.

"Are you aware of what you do," persisted the lawyer, "if you appoint
Mr. Turlington as sole executor and trustee? You put it in the power of
your daughter's husband, sir, to make away with every farthing of your
money after your death."

Turlington had hitherto listened with an appearance of interest in the
proceedings, which he assumed as an act of politeness. To his view, the
future was limited to the date at which Bulpit Brothers had a right to
claim the repayment of their loan. The Will was a matter of no earthly
importance to him, by comparison with the infinitely superior interest
of the Marriage. It was only when the lawyer's brutally plain language
forced his attention to it that the question of his pecuniary interest
in his father-in-law's death assumed its fit position in his mind.

_His_ color rose; and _he_ too showed that he was offended by what Mr.
Dicas had just said.

"Not a word, Richard! Let me speak for you as well as for myself," said
Sir Joseph. "For seven years past," he continued, turning to the lawyer,
"I have been accustomed to place the most unlimited trust in Richard
Turlington. His disinterested advice has enabled me largely to increase
my income, without placing a farthing of the principal in jeopardy. On
more than one occasion, I have entreated him to make use of my money
in his business. He has invariably refused to do so. Even his bitterest
enemies, sir, have been obliged to acknowledge that my interests were
safe when committed to his care. Am I to begin distrusting him, now
that I am about to give him my daughter in marriage? Am I to leave it on
record that I doubt him for the first time--when my Will is opened after
my death? No! I can confide the management of the fortune which my child
will inherit after me to no more competent or more honorable hands than
the hands of the man who is to marry her. I maintain my appointment, Mr.
Dicas! I persist in placing the whole responsibility under my Will in my
son-in-law's care."

Turlington attempted to speak. The lawyer attempted to speak. Sir
Joseph--with a certain simple dignity which had its effect on both of
them--declined to hear a word on either side. "No, Richard! as long as
I am alive this is my business, not yours. No, Mr. Dicas! I understand
that it is your business to protest professionally. You have protested.
Fill in the blank space as I have told you. Or leave the instructions on
the table, and I will send for the nearest solicitor to complete them in
your place."

Those words placed the lawyer's position plainly before him. He had no
choice but to do as he was bid, or to lose a good client. He did as he
was bid, and grimly left the room.

Sir Joseph, with old-fashioned politeness, followed him as far as
the hall. Returning to the library to say a few friendly words before
finally dismissing the subject of the Will, he found himself seized by
the arm, and dragged without ceremony, in Turlington's powerful grasp,
to the window.

"Richard!" he exclaimed, "what does this mean?"

"Look!" cried the other, pointing through the window to a grassy walk
in the grounds, bounded on either side by shrubberies, and situated at a
little distance from the house. "Who is that man?--quick! before we lose
sight of him--the man crossing there from one shrubbery to the other?"
Sir Joseph failed to recognize the figure before it disappeared.
Turlington whispered fiercely, close to his ear--"Launcelot Linzie!"

In perfect good faith Sir Joseph declared that the man could not
possibly have been Launce. Turlington's frenzy of jealous suspicion was
not to be so easily calmed. He asked significantly for Natalie. She was
reported to be walking in the grounds. "I knew it!" he said, with
an oath--and hurried out into the grounds to discover the truth for
himself.

Some little time elapsed before he came back to the house. He had
discovered Natalie--alone. Not a sign of Launce had rewarded his search.
For the hundredth time he had offended Natalie. For the hundredth time
he was compelled to appeal to the indulgence of her father and her aunt.
"It won't happen again," he said, sullenly penitent. "You will find me
quite another man when I have got you all at my house in the country.
Mind!" he burst out, with a furtive look, which expressed his inveterate
distrust of Natalie and of every one about her. "Mind! it's settled
that you all come to me in Somersetshire, on Monday next." Sir Joseph
answered rather dryly that it was settled. Turlington turned to leave
the room--and suddenly came back. "It's understood," he went on,
addressing Miss Lavinia, "that the seventh of next month is the date
fixed for the marriage. Not a day later!" Miss Lavinia replied, rather
dryly on her side, "Of course, Richard; not a day later." He muttered,
"All right" and hurriedly left them.

Half an hour afterward Natalie came in, looking a little confused.

"Has he gone?" she asked, whispering to her aunt.

Relieved on this point, she made straight for the library--a room which
she rarely entered at that or any other period of the day. Miss Lavinia
followed her, curious to know what it meant. Natalie hurried to the
window, and waved her handkerchief--evidently making a signal to some
one outside. Miss Lavinia instantly joined her, and took her sharply by
the hand.

"Is it possible, Natalie?" she asked. "Has Launcelot Linzie really been
here, unknown to your father or to me?"

"Where is the harm if he has?" answered Natalie, with a sudden outbreak
of temper. "Am I never to see my cousin again, because Mr. Turlington
happens to be jealous of him?"

She suddenly turned away her head. The rich color flowed over her face
and neck. Miss Lavinia, proceeding sternly with the administration
of the necessary reproof, was silenced midway by a new change in her
niece's variable temper. Natalie burst into tears. Satisfied with this
appearance of sincere contrition, the old lady consented to overlook
what had happened; and, for this occasion only, to keep her niece's
secret. They would all be in Somersetshire, she remarked, before any
more breaches of discipline could be committed. Richard had fortunately
made no discoveries; and the matter might safely be trusted, all things
considered, to rest where it was.

Miss Lavinia might possibly have taken a less hopeful view of the
circumstances, if she had known that one of the men-servants at Muswell
Hill was in Richard Turlington's pay, and that this servant had seen
Launce leave the grounds by the back-garden gate.




NINTH SCENE.

The Drawing-Room.


"Amelia!"

"Say something."

"Ask him to sit down."

Thus addressing one another in whispers, the three stepdaughters of
Lady Winwood stood bewildered in their own drawing-room, helplessly
confronting an object which appeared before them on the threshold of the
door.

The date was the 23d of December. The time was between two and three in
the afternoon. The occasion was the return of the three sisters from the
Committee meeting of the Sacred Concerts' Society. And the object was
Richard Turlington.

He stood hat in hand at the door, amazed by his reception. "I have come
up this morning from Somersetshire," he said. "Haven't you heard? A
matter of business at the office has forced me to leave my guests at my
house in the country. I return to them to-morrow. When I say my guests,
I mean the Graybrookes. Don't you know they are staying with me? Sir
Joseph and Miss Lavinia and Natalie?" On the utterance of Natalie's
name, the sisters roused themselves. They turned about and regarded each
other with looks of dismay. Turlington's patience began to fail him.
"Will you be so good as to tell me what all this means?" he said, a
little sharply. "Miss Lavinia asked me to call here when she heard I was
coming to town. I was to take charge of a pattern for a dress, which she
said you would give me. You ought to have received a telegram explaining
it all, hours since. Has the message not reached you?"

The leading spirit of the three sisters was Miss Amelia. She was the
first who summoned presence of mind enough to give a plain answer to
Turlington's plain question.

"We received the telegram this morning," she said. "Something has
happened since which has shocked and surprised us. We beg your pardon."
She turned to one of her sisters. "Sophia, the pattern is ready in the
drawer of that table behind you. Give it to Mr. Turlington."

Sophia produced the packet. Before she handed it to the visitor, she
looked at her sister. "Ought we to let Mr. Turlington go," she asked,
"as if nothing had happened?"

Amelia considered silently with herself. Dorothea, the third sister
(who had not spoken yet), came forward with a suggestion. She proposed,
before proceeding further, to inquire whether Lady Winwood was in the
house. The idea was instantly adopted. Sophia rang the bell. Amelia put
the questions when the servant appeared.

Lady Winwood had left the house for a drive immediately after luncheon.
Lord Winwood--inquired for next--had accompanied her ladyship. No
message had been left indicating the hour of their return.

The sisters looked at Turlington, uncertain what to say or do next. Miss
Amelia addressed him as soon as the servant had left the room.

"Is it possible for you to remain here until either my father or Lady
Winwood return?" she asked.

"It is quite impossible. Minutes are of importance to me to-day."

"Will you give us one of your minutes? We want to consider something
which we may have to say to you before you go."

Turlington, wondering, took a chair. Miss Amelia put the case before her
sisters from the sternly conscientious point of view, at the opposite
end of the room.

"We have not found out this abominable deception by any underhand
means," she said. "The discovery has been forced upon us, and we stand
pledged to nobody to keep the secret. Knowing as we do how cruelly this
gentleman has been used, it seems to me that we are bound in honor to
open his eyes to the truth. If we remain silent we make ourselves
Lady Winwood's accomplices. I, for one--I don't care what may come of
it--refuse to do that."

Her sisters agreed with her. The first chance their clever stepmother
had given them of asserting their importance against hers was now in
their hands. Their jealous hatred of Lady Winwood assumed the mask of
Duty--duty toward an outraged and deceived fellow-creature. Could any
earthly motive be purer than that? "Tell him, Amelia!" cried the two
young ladies, with the headlong recklessness of the sex which only stops
to think when the time for reflection has gone by.

A vague sense of something wrong began to stir uneasily in Turlington's
mind.

"Don't let me hurry you," he said, "but if you really have anything to
tell me--"

Miss Amelia summoned her courage, and began.

"We have something very dreadful to tell you," she said, interrupting
him. "You have been presented in this house, Mr. Turlington, as
a gentleman engaged to marry Lady Winwood's cousin. Miss Natalie
Graybrooke." She paused there--at the outset of the disclosure. A sudden
change of expression passed over Turlington's face, which daunted her
for the moment. "We have hitherto understood," she went on, "that you
were to be married to that young lady early in next month."

"Well?"

He could say that one word. Looking at their pale faces, and their eager
eyes, he could say no more.

"Take care!" whispered Dorothea, in her sister's ear. "Look at him,
Amelia! Not too soon."

Amelia went on more carefully.

"We have just returned from a musical meeting," she said. "One of the
ladies there was an acquaintance, a former school-fellow of ours. She
is the wife of the rector of St. Columb Major--a large church, far from
this--at the East End of London."

"I know nothing about the woman or the church," interposed Turlington,
sternly.

"I must beg you to wait a little. I can't tell you what I want to tell
you unless I refer to the rector's wife. She knows Lady Winwood by
name. And she heard of Lady Winwood recently under very strange
circumstances--circumstances connected with a signature in one of the
books of the church."

Turlington lost his self-control. "You have got something against my
Natalie," he burst out; "I know it by your whispering, I see it in your
looks! Say it at once in plain words."

There was no trifling with him now. In plain words Amelia said it.

* * * * * * * * *

There was silence in the room. They could hear the sound of passing
footsteps in the street. He stood perfectly still on the spot where they
had struck him dumb by the disclosure, supporting himself with his
right hand laid on the head of a sofa near him. The sisters drew back
horror-struck into the furthest corner of the room. His face turned them
cold. Through the mute misery which it had expressed at first, there
appeared, slowly forcing its way to view, a look of deadly vengeance
which froze them to the soul. They whispered feverishly one to the
other, without knowing what they were talking of, without hearing their
own voices. One of them said, "Ring the bell!" Another said, "Offer him
something, he will faint." The third shuddered, and repeated, over and
over again, "Why did we do it? Why did we do it?"

He silenced them on the instant by speaking on his side. He came on
slowly, by a step at a time, with the big drops of agony falling slowly
over his rugged face. He said, in a hoarse whisper, "Write me down the
name of the church--there." He held out his open pocketbook to Amelia
while he spoke. She steadied herself, and wrote the address. She tried
to say a word to soften him. The word died on her lips. There was a
light in his eyes as they looked at her which transfigured his face to
something superhuman and devilish. She turned away from him, shuddering.

He put the book back in his pocket, and passed his handkerchief over his
face. After a moment of indecision, he suddenly and swiftly stole out of
the room, as if he was afraid of their calling somebody in, and stopping
him. At the door he turned round for a moment, and said, "You will hear
how this ends. I wish you good-morning."

The door closed on him. Left by themselves, they began to realize it.
They thought of the consequences when his back was turned and it was too
late.

The Graybrookes! Now he knew it, what would become of the Graybrookes?
What would he do when he got back? Even at ordinary times--when he was
on his best behavior--he was a rough man. What would happen? Oh, good
God! what would happen when he and Natalie next stood face to face? It
was a lonely house--Natalie had told them about it--no neighbors near;
nobody by to interfere but the weak old father and the maiden aunt.
Something ought to be done. Some steps ought to be taken to warn them.
Advice--who could give advice? Who was the first person who ought to
be told of what had happened? Lady Winwood? No! even at that crisis the
sisters still shrank from their stepmother--still hated her with the old
hatred! Not a word to _her!_ They owed no duty to _her!_ Who else could
they appeal to? To their father? Yes! There was the person to advise
them. In the meanwhile, silence toward their stepmother--silence toward
every one till their father came back!

They waited and waited. One after another the precious hours, pregnant
with the issues of life and death, followed each other on the dial. Lady
Winwood returned alone. She had left her husband at the House of Lords.
Dinner-time came, and brought with it a note from his lordship. There
was a debate at the House. Lady Winwood and his daughters were not to
wait dinner for him.




TENTH SCENE.

Green Anchor Lane.

An hour later than the time at which he had been expected, Richard
Turlington appeared at his office in the city.

He met beforehand all the inquiries which the marked change in him
must otherwise have provoked, by announcing that he was ill. Before he
proceeded to business, he asked if anybody was waiting to see him. One
of the servants from Muswell Hill was waiting with another parcel
for Miss Lavinia, ordered by telegram from the country that morning.
Turlington (after ascertaining the servant's name) received the man in
his private room. He there heard, for the first time, that Launcelot
Linzie had been lurking in the grounds (exactly as he had supposed) on
the day when the lawyer took his instructions for the Settlement and the
Will.

In two hours more Turlington's work was completed. On leaving the
office--as soon as he was out of sight of the door--he turned eastward,
instead of taking the way that led to his own house in town. Pursuing
his course, he entered the labyrinth of streets which led, in that
quarter of East London, to the unsavory neighborhood of the river-side.

By this time his mind was made up. The forecast shadow of meditated
crime traveled before him already, as he threaded his way among his
fellow-men.

He had been to the vestry of St. Columb Major, and had satisfied himself
that he was misled by no false report. There was the entry in the
Marriage Register. The one unexplained mystery was the mystery of
Launce's conduct in permitting his wife to return to her father's house.
Utterly unable to account for this proceeding, Turlington could only
accept facts as they were, and determine to make the most of his time,
while the woman who had deceived him was still under his roof. A hideous
expression crossed his face as he realized the idea that he had got her
(unprotected by her husband) in his house. "When Launcelot Linzie _does_
come to claim her," he said to himself, "he shall find I have been even
with him." He looked at his watch. Was it possible to save the last
train and get back that night? No--the last train had gone. Would she
take advantage of his absence to escape? He had little fear of it. She
would never have allowed her aunt to send him to Lord Winwood's house,
if she had felt the slightest suspicion of his discovering the truth in
that quarter. Returning by the first train the next morning, he might
feel sure of getting back in time. Meanwhile he had the hours of the
night before him. He could give his mind to the serious question that
must be settled before he left London--the question of repaying the
forty thousand pounds. There was but one way of getting the money now.
Sir Joseph had executed his Will; Sir Joseph's death would leave his
sole executor and trustee (the lawyer had said it!) master of his
fortune. Turlington determined to be master of it in four-and-twenty
hours--striking the blow, without risk to himself, by means of another
hand. In the face of the probabilities, in the face of the facts, he had
now firmly persuaded himself that Sir Joseph was privy to the fraud
that had been practiced on him. The Marriage-Settlement, the Will, the
presence of the family at his country house--all these he believed to be
so many stratagems invented to keep him deceived until the last moment.
The truth was in those words which he had overheard between Sir Joseph
and Launce--and in Launce's presence (privately encouraged, no doubt) at
Muswell Hill. "Her father shall pay me for it doubly: with his purse and
with his life." With that thought in his heart, Richard Turlington wound
his way through the streets by the river-side, and stopped at a blind
alley called Green Anchor Lane, infamous to this day as the chosen
resort of the most abandoned wretches whom London can produce.

The policeman at the corner cautioned him as he turned into the alley.
"They won't hurt _me!_" he answered, and walked on to a public-house at
the bottom of the lane.

The landlord at the door silently recognized him, and led the way
in. They crossed a room filled with sailors of all nations drinking;
ascended a staircase at the back of the house, and stopped at the door
of the room on the second floor. There the landlord spoke for the first
time. "He has outrun his allowance, sir, as usual. You will find him
with hardly a rag on his back. I doubt if he will last much longer. He
had another fit of the horrors last night, and the doctor thinks badly
of him." With that introduction he opened the door, and Turlington
entered the room.

On the miserable bed lay a gray-headed old man of gigantic stature,
with nothing on him but a ragged shirt and a pair of patched, filthy
trousers. At the side of the bed, with a bottle of gin on the rickety
table between them, sat two hideous leering, painted monsters, wearing
the dress of women. The smell of opium was in the room, as well as the
smell of spirits. At Turlington's appearance, the old man rose on the
bed and welcomed him with greedy eyes and outstretched hand.

"Money, master!" he called out hoarsely. "A crown piece in advance, for
the sake of old times!"

Turlington turned to the women without answering, purse in hand.

"His clothes are at the pawnbroker's, of course. How much?"

"Thirty shillings."

"Bring them here, and be quick about it. You will find it worth your
while when you come back."

The women took the pawnbroker's tickets from the pockets of the man's
trousers and hurried out.

Turlington closed the door, and seated himself by the bedside. He laid
his hand familiarly on the giant's mighty shoulder, looked him full in
the face, and said, in a whisper,

"Thomas Wildfang!"

The man started, and drew his huge hairy hand across his eyes, as if in
doubt whether he was waking or sleeping. "It's better than ten years,
master, since you called me by my name. If I am Thomas Wildfang, what
are you?"

"Your captain, once more."

Thomas Wildfang sat up on the side of the bed, and spoke his next words
cautiously in Turlington's ear.

"Another man in the way?"

"Yes."

The giant shook his bald, bestial head dolefully. "Too late. I'm past
the job. Look here."

He held up his hand, and showed it trembling incessantly. "I'm an old
man," he said, and let his hand drop heavily again on the bed beside
him.

Turlington looked at the door, and whispered back,

"The man is as old as you are. And the money is worth having."

"How much?"

"A hundred pounds."

The eyes of Thomas Wildfang fastened greedily on Turlington's face.
"Let's hear," he said. "Softly, captain. Let's hear."

* * * * * * * * *

When the women came back with the clothes, Turlington had left the room.
Their promised reward lay waiting for them on the table, and Thomas
Wildfang was eager to dress himself and be gone. They could get but one
answer from him to every question they put. He had business in hand,
which was not to be delayed. They would see him again in a day or two,
with money in his purse. With that assurance he took his cudgel from
the corner of the room, and stalked out swiftly by the back door of the
house into the night.




ELEVENTH SCENE.

Outside the House

The evening was chilly, but not cold for the time of year. There was no
moon. The stars were out, and the wind was quiet. Upon the whole, the
inhabitants of the little Somersetshire village of Baxdale agreed that
it was as fine a Christmas-eve as they could remember for some years
past.

Toward eight in the evening the one small street of the village was
empty, except at that part of it which was occupied by the public-house.
For the most part, people gathered round their firesides, with an eye to
their suppers, and watched the process of cooking comfortably indoors.
The old bare, gray church, situated at some little distance from the
village, looked a lonelier object than usual in the dim starlight. The
vicarage, nestling close under the shadow of the church-tower, threw
no illumination of fire-light or candle-light on the dreary scene. The
clergyman's shutters fitted well, and the clergyman's curtains were
closely drawn. The one ray of light that cheered the wintry darkness
streamed from the unguarded window of a lonely house, separated from
the vicarage by the whole length of the church-yard. A man stood at the
window, holding back the shutter, and looking out attentively over the
dim void of the burial-ground. The man was Richard Turlington. The room
in which he was watching was a room in his own house.

A momentary spark of light flashed up, as from a kindled match, in the
burial-ground. Turlington instantly left the empty room in which he had
been watching. Passing down the back garden of the house, and crossing
a narrow lane at the bottom of it, he opened a gate in a low stone wall
beyond, and entered the church-yard. The shadowy figure of a man of
great stature, lurking among the graves, advanced to meet him. Midway
in the dark and lonely place the two stopped and consulted together in
whispers. Turlington spoke first.

"Have you taken up your quarters at the public-house in the village?"

"Yes, master."

"Did you find your way, while the daylight lasted, to the deserted
malt-house behind my orchard wall?"

"Yes, master."

"Now listen--we have no time to lose. Hide there, behind that monument.
Before nine o'clock to-night you will see me cross the churchyard, as
far as this place, with the man you are to wait for. He is going to
spend an hour with the vicar, at the house yonder. I shall stop short
here, and say to him, 'You can't miss your way in the dark now--I will
go back.' When I am far enough away from him, I shall blow a call on
my whistle. The moment you hear the call, follow the man, and drop him
before he gets out of the church-yard. Have you got your cudgel?"

Thomas Wildfang held up his cudgel. Turlington took him by the arm, and
felt it suspiciously.

"You have had an attack of the horrors already," he said. "What does
this trembling mean?"

He took a spirit-flask from his pocket as he spoke. Thomas Wildfang
snatched it out of his hand, and emptied it at a draught. "All right
now, master," he said. Turlington felt his arm once more. It was
steadier already. Wildfang brandished his cudgel, and struck a heavy
blow with it on one of the turf mounds near them. "Will that drop him,
captain?" he asked.

Turlington went on with his instructions.

"Rob him when you have dropped him. Take his money and his jewelry. I
want to have the killing of him attributed to robbery as the motive.
Make sure before you leave him that he is dead. Then go to the
malt-house. There is no fear of your being seen; all the people will be
indoors, keeping Christmas-eve. You will find a change of clothes hidden
in the malt-house, and an old caldron full of quicklime. Destroy the
clothes you have got on, and dress yourself in the other clothes
that you find. Follow the cross-road, and when it brings you into the
highroad, turn to the left; a four-mile walk will take you to the town
of Harminster. Sleep there to-night, and travel to London by the train
in the morning. The next day go to my office, see the head clerk, and
say, 'I have come to sign my receipt.' Sign it in your own name, and you
will receive your hundred pounds. There are your instructions. Do you
understand them?"

Wildfang nodded his head in silent token that he understood, and
disappeared again among the graves. Turlington went back to the house.

He had advanced midway across the garden, when he was startled by the
sound of footsteps in the lane--at that part of it which skirted one of
the corners of the house. Hastening forward, he placed himself behind a
projection in the wall, so as to see the person pass across the stream
of light from the uncovered window of the room that he had left. The
stranger was walking rapidly. All Turlington could see as he crossed the
field of light was, that his hat was pulled over his eyes, and that he
had a thick beard and mustache. Describing the man to the servant on
entering the house, he was informed that a stranger with a large beard
had been seen about the neighborhood for some days past. The account he
had given of himself stated that he was a surveyor, engaged in taking
measurements for a new map of that part of the country, shortly to be
published.

The guilty mind of Turlington was far from feeling satisfied with
the meager description of the stranger thus rendered. He could not be
engaged in surveying in the dark. What could he want in the desolate
neighborhood of the house and church-yard at that time of night?

The man wanted--what the man found a little lower down the lane, hidden
in a dismantled part of the church-yard wall--a letter from a young
lady. Read by the light of the pocket-lantern which he carried with him,
the letter first congratulated this person on the complete success of
his disguise--and then promised that the writer would be ready at her
bedroom window for flight the next morning, before the house was astir.
The signature was "Natalie," and the person addressed was "Dearest
Launce."

In the meanwhile, Turlington barred the window shutters of the room, and
looked at his watch. It wanted only a quarter to nine o'clock. He took
his dog-whistle from the chimney-piece, and turned his steps at once in
the direction of the drawing-room, in which his guests were passing the
evening.




TWELFTH SCENE.

Inside the House.

The scene in the drawing-room represented the ideal of domestic comfort.
The fire of wood and coal mixed burned brightly; the lamps shed a soft
glow of light; the solid shutters and the thick red curtains kept the
cold night air on the outer side of two long windows, which opened on
the back garden. Snug arm-chairs were placed in every part of the
room. In one of them Sir Joseph reclined, fast asleep; in another, Miss
Lavinia sat knitting; a third chair, apart from the rest, near a round
table in one corner of the room, was occupied by Natalie. Her head was
resting on her hand, an unread book lay open on her lap. She looked pale
and harassed; anxiety and suspense had worn her down to the shadow of
her former self. On entering the room, Turlington purposely closed the
door with a bang. Natalie started. Miss Lavinia looked up reproachfully.
The object was achieved--Sir Joseph was roused from his sleep.

"If you are going to the vicar's to-night. Graybrooke," said Turlington,
"it's time you were off, isn't it?"

Sir Joseph rubbed his eyes, and looked at the clock on the mantel-piece.
"Yes, yes, Richard," he answered, drowsily, "I suppose I must go. Where
is my hat?"

His sister and his daughter both joined in trying to persuade him to
send an excuse instead of groping his way to the vicarage in the dark.
Sir Joseph hesitated, as usual. He and the vicar had run up a sudden
friendship, on the strength of their common enthusiasm for the
old-fashioned game of backgammon. Victorious over his opponent on the
previous evening at Turlington's house, Sir Joseph had promised to pass
that evening at the vicarage, and give the vicar his revenge. Observing
his indecision, Turlington cunningly irritated him by affecting to
believe that he was really unwilling to venture out in the dark. "I'll
see you safe across the churchyard," he said; "and the vicar's servant
will see you safe back." The tone in which he spoke instantly roused
Sir Joseph. "I am not in my second childhood yet, Richard," he replied,
testily. "I can find my way by myself." He kissed his daughter on the
forehead. "No fear, Natalie. I shall be back in time for the mulled
claret. No, Richard, I won't trouble you." He kissed his hand to his
sister and went out into the hall for his hat: Turlington following him
with a rough apology, and asking as a favor to be permitted to accompany
him part of the way only. The ladies, left behind in the drawing-room,
heard the apology accepted by kind-hearted Sir Joseph. The two went out
together.

"Have you noticed Richard since his return?" asked Miss Lavinia. "I
fancy he must have heard bad news in London. He looks as if he had
something on his mind."

"I haven't remarked it, aunt."

For the time, no more was said. Miss Lavinia went monotonously on with
her knitting. Natalie pursued her own anxious thoughts over the unread
pages of the book in her lap. Suddenly the deep silence out of doors and
in was broken by a shrill whistle, sounding from the direction of the
church-yard. Natalie started with a faint cry of alarm. Miss Lavinia
looked up from her knitting.

"My dear child, your nerves must be sadly out of order. What is there to
be frightened at?"

"I am not very well, aunt. It is so still here at night, the slightest
noises startle me."

There was another interval of silence. It was past nine o'clock when
they heard the back door opened and closed again. Turlington came
hurriedly into the drawing-room, as if he had some reason for wishing to
rejoin the ladies as soon as possible. To the surprise of both of them,
he sat down abruptly in the corner, with his face to the wall, and took
up the newspaper, without casting a look at them or uttering a word.

"Is Joseph safe at the vicarage?" asked Miss Lavinia.

"All right." He gave the answer in a short, surly tone, still without
looking round.

Miss Lavinia tried him again. "Did you hear a whistle while you were
out? It quite startled Natalie in the stillness of this place."

He turned half-way round. "My shepherd, I suppose," he said after
a pause--"whistling for his dog." He turned back again and immersed
himself in his newspaper.

Miss Lavinia beckoned to her niece and pointed significantly to
Turlington. After one reluctant look at him, Natalie laid her head
wearily on her aunt's shoulder. "Sleepy, my dear?" whispered the old
lady. "Uneasy, aunt--I don't know why," Natalie whispered back. "I would
give the world to be in London, and to hear the carriages going by, and
the people talking in the street."

Turlington suddenly dropped his newspaper. "What's the secret between
you two?" he called out roughly. "What are you whispering about?"

"We wish not to disturb you over your reading, that is all," said Miss
Lavinia, coldly. "Has anything happened to vex you, Richard?"

"What the devil makes you think that?"

The old lady was offended, and showed it by saying nothing more. Natalie
nestled closer to her aunt. One after another the clock ticked off
the minutes with painful distinctness in the stillness of the room.
Turlington suddenly threw aside the newspaper and left his corner.
"Let's be good friends!" he burst out, with a clumsy assumption of
gayety. "This isn't keeping Christmas-eve. Let's talk and be sociable.
Dearest Natalie!" He threw his arm roughly round Natalie, and drew her
by main force away from her aunt. She turned deadly pale, and struggled
to release herself. "I am suffering--I am ill--let me go!" He was deaf
to her entreaties. "What! your husband that is to be, treated in this
way? Mustn't I have a kiss?--I will!" He held her closer with one hand,
and, seizing her head with the other, tried to turn her lips to him. She
resisted with the inbred nervous strength which the weakest woman living
has in reserve when she is outraged. Half indignant, half terrified, at
Turlington's roughness, Miss Lavinia rose to interfere. In a moment more
he would have had two women to overpower instead of one, when a noise
outside the window suddenly suspended the ignoble struggle.

There was a sound of footsteps on the gravel-walk which ran between the
house wall and the garden lawn. It was followed by a tap--a single faint
tap, no more--on one of the panes of glass.

They all three stood still. For a moment more nothing was audible. Then
there was a heavy shock, as of something falling outside. Then a groan,
then another interval of silence--a long silence, interrupted no more.

Turlington's arm dropped from Natalie. She drew back to her aunt.
Looking at him instinctively, in the natural expectation that he would
take the lead in penetrating the mystery of what had happened outside
the window, the two women were thunderstruck to see that he was, to
all appearance, even more startled and more helpless than they were.
"Richard," said Miss Lavinia, pointing to the window, "there is
something wrong out there. See what it is." He stood motionless, as if
he had not heard her, his eyes fixed on the window, his face livid with
terror.

The silence outside was broken once more; this time by a call for help.

A cry of horror burst from Natalie. The voice outside--rising wildly,
then suddenly dying away again--was not entirely strange to _her_ ears.
She tore aside the curtain. With voice and hand she roused her aunt to
help her. The two lifted the heavy bar from its socket; they opened the
shutters and the window. The cheerful light of the room flowed out over
the body of a prostrate man, lying on his face. They turned the man
over. Natalie lifted his head.

Her father!

His face was bedabbled with blood. A wound, a frightful wound, was
visible on the side of his bare head, high above the ear. He looked at
her, his eyes recognized her, before he fainted again in her arms.
His hands and his clothes were covered with earth stains. He must
have traversed some distance; in that dreadful condition he must have
faltered and fallen more than once before he reached the house. His
sister wiped the blood from his face. His daughter called on him
frantically to forgive her before he died--the harmless, gentle,
kind-hearted father, who had never said a hard word to her! The father
whom she had deceived!

The terrified servants hurried into the room. Their appearance roused
their master from the extraordinary stupor that had seized him. He was
at the window before the footman could get there. The two lifted Sir
Joseph into the room, and laid him on the sofa. Natalie knelt by him,
supporting his head. Miss Lavinia stanched the flowing blood with her
handkerchief. The women-servants brought linen and cold water. The man
hurried away for the doctor, who lived on the other side of the village.
Left alone again with Turlington, Natalie noticed that his eyes were
fixed in immovable scrutiny on her father's head. He never said a word.
He looked, looked, looked at the wound.

The doctor arrived. Before either the daughter or the sister of the
injured man could put the question, Turlington put it--"Will he live or
die?"

The doctor's careful finger probed the wound.

"Make your minds easy. A little lower down, or in front, the blow might
have been serious. As it is, there is no harm done. Keep him quiet, and
he will be all right again in two or three days."

Hearing those welcome words, Natalie and her aunt sank on their knees in
silent gratitude. After dressing the wound, the doctor looked round for
the master of the house. Turlington, who had been so breathlessly eager
but a few minutes since, seemed to have lost all interest in the case
now. He stood apart, at the window, looking out toward the church-yard,
thinking. The questions which it was the doctor's duty to ask were
answered by the ladies. The servants assisted in examining the injured
man's clothes: they discovered that his watch and purse were both
missing. When it became necessary to carry him upstairs, it was the
footman who assisted the doctor. The foot man's master, without a word
of explanation, walked out bare headed into the back garden, on the
search, as the doctor and the servants supposed, for some trace of the
robber who had attempted Sir Joseph's life.

His absence was hardly noticed at the time. The difficulty of conveying
the wounded man to his room absorbed the attention of all the persons
present.

Sir Joseph partially recovered his senses while they were taking him up
the steep and narrow stairs. Carefully as they carried the patient, the
motion wrung a groan from him before they reached the top. The bedroom
corridor, in the rambling, irregularly built house rose and fell on
different levels. At the door of the first bedchamber the doctor asked a
little anxiously if that was the room. No; there were three more stairs
to go down, and a corner to turn, before they could reach it. The first
room was Natalie's. She instantly offered it for her father's use. The
doctor (seeing that it was the airiest as well as the nearest room)
accepted the proposal. Sir Joseph had been laid comfortably in his
daughter's bed; the doctor had just left them, with renewed assurances
that they need feel no anxiety, when they heard a heavy step below
stairs. Turlington had re-entered the house.

(He had been looking, as they had supposed, for the ruffian who had
attacked Sir Joseph; with a motive, however, for the search at which it
was impossible for other persons to guess. His own safety was now bound
up in the safety of Thomas Wildfang. As soon as he was out of sight in
the darkness, he made straight for the malt-house. The change of clothes
was there untouched; not a trace of his accomplice was to be seen.
Where else to look for him it was impossible to tell. Turlington had no
alternative but to go back to the house, and ascertain if suspicion had
been aroused in his absence.)

He had only to ascend the stairs, and to see, through the open door,
that Sir Joseph had been placed in his daughter's room.

"What does this mean?" he asked, roughly.

Before it was possible to answer him the footman appeared with a
message. The doctor had come back to the door to say that he would take
on himself the necessary duty of informing the constable of what had
happened, on his return to the village. Turlington started and changed
color. If Wildfang was found by others, and questioned in his employer's
absence, serious consequences might follow. "The constable is my
business," said Turlington, hurriedly descending the stairs; "I'll go
with the doctor." They heard him open the door below, then close it
again (as if some sudden thought had struck him), and call to the
footman. The house was badly provided with servants' bedrooms. The
women-servants only slept indoors. The footman occupied a room over the
stables. Natalie and her aunt heard Turlington dismiss the man for the
night, an hour earlier than usual at least. His next proceeding was
stranger still. Looking cautiously over the stairs, Natalie saw him lock
all the doors on the ground-floor and take out the keys. When he went
away, she heard him lock the front door behind him. Incredible as it
seemed, there could be no doubt of the fact--the inmates of the house
were imprisoned till he came back. What did it mean?

(It meant that Turlington's vengeance still remained to be wreaked on
the woman who had deceived him. It meant that Sir Joseph's life still
stood between the man who had compassed his death and the money which
the man was resolved to have. It meant that Richard Turlington was
driven to bay, and that the horror and the peril of the night were not
at an end yet.)

Natalie and her aunt looked at each other across the bed on which Sir
Joseph lay. He had fallen into a kind of doze; no enlightenment could
come to them from _him_. They could only ask each other, with beating
hearts and baffled minds, what Richard's conduct meant--they could only
feel instinctively that some dreadful discovery was hanging over them.
The aunt was the calmer of the two--there was no secret weighing heavily
on _her_ conscience. _She_ could feel the consolations of religion. "Our
dear one is spared to us, my love," said the old lady, gently. "God has
been good to us. We are in his hands. If we know that, we know enough."

As she spoke there was a loud ring at the doorbell. The women-servants
crowded into the bedroom in alarm. Strong in numbers, and encouraged by
Natalie--who roused herself and led the way--they confronted the risk
of opening the window and of venturing out on the balcony which extended
along that side of the house. A man was dimly visible below. He called
to them in thick, unsteady accents. The servants recognized him: he was
the telegraphic messenger from the railway. They went down to speak to
him--and returned with a telegram which had been pushed in under the
door. The distance from the station was considerable; the messenger had
been "keeping Christmas" in more than one beer-shop on his way to the
house; and the delivery of the telegram had been delayed for some
hours. It was addressed to Natalie. She opened it--looked at it--dropped
it--and stood speechless; her lips parted in horror, her eyes staring
vacantly straight before her.

Miss Lavinia took the telegram from the floor, and read these lines:

"Lady Winwood, Hertford Street, London. To Natalie Graybrooke, Church
Meadows, Baxdale, Somersetshire. Dreadful news. R. T. has discovered
your marriage to Launce. The truth has been kept from me till to-day
(24th). Instant flight with your husband is your only chance. I would
have communicated with Launce, but I do not know his address. You
will receive this, I hope and believe, before R. T. can return to
Somersetshire. Telegraph back, I entreat you, to say that you are safe.
I shall follow my message if I do not hear from you in reasonable time."

Miss Lavinia lifted her gray head, and looked at her niece. "Is this
true?" she said--and pointed to the venerable face laid back, white, on
the white pillow of the bed. Natalie sank forward as her eyes met the
eyes of her aunt. Miss Lavinia saved her from falling insensible on the
floor.

* * * * * * * * *

The confession had been made. The words of penitence and the words of
pardon had been spoken. The peaceful face of the father still lay hushed
in rest. One by one the minutes succeeded each other uneventfully in the
deep tranquillity of the night. It was almost a relief when the silence
was disturbed once more by another sound outside the house. A pebble
was thrown up at the window, and a voice called out cautiously, "Miss
Lavinia!"

They recognized the voice of the man-servant, and at once opened the
window.

He had something to say to the ladies in private. How could he say it?
A domestic circumstance which had been marked by Launce, as favorable
to the contemplated elopement, was now noticed by the servant as lending
itself readily to effecting the necessary communication with the ladies.
The lock of the gardener's tool-house (in the shrubbery close by) was
under repair; and the gardener's ladder was accessible to any one who
wanted it. At the short height of the balcony from the ground, the
ladder was more than long enough for the purpose required. In a few
minutes the servant had mounted to the balcony, and could speak to
Natalie and her aunt at the window.

"I can't rest quiet," said the man, "I'm off on the sly to see what's
going on down in the village. It's hard on ladies like you to be locked
in here. Is there anything I can do for either of you?"

Natalie took up Lady Winwood's telegram. "Launce ought to see this,"
she said to her aunt. "He will be here at daybreak," she added, in a
whisper, "if I don't tell him what has happened."

Miss Lavinia turned pale. "If he and Richard meet--" she began. "Tell
him!" she added, hurriedly--"tell him before it is too late!"

Natalie wrote a few lines (addressed to Launce in his assumed name at
his lodgings in the village) inclosing Lady Winwood's telegram, and
entreating him to do nothing rash. When the servant had disappeared with
the letter, there was one hope in her mind and in her aunt's mind, which
each was ashamed to acknowledge to the other--the hope that Launce would
face the very danger that they dreaded for him, and come to the house.

They had not been long alone again, when Sir Joseph drowsily opened his
eyes and asked what they were doing in his room. They told him gently
that he was ill. He put his hand up to his head, and said they were
right, and so dropped off again into slumber. Worn out by the emotions
through which they had passed, the two women silently waited for the
march of events. The same stupor of resignation possessed them both.
They had secured the door and the window. They had prayed together. They
had kissed the quiet face on the pillow. They had said to each other,
"We will live with him or die with him as God pleases." Miss Lavinia
sat by the bedside. Natalie was on a stool at her feet--with her eyes
closed, and her head on her aunt's knee.

Time went on. The clock in the hall had struck--ten or eleven, they
were not sure which--when they heard the signal which warned them of the
servant's return from the village. He brought news, and more than news;
he brought a letter from Launce.

Natalie read these lines:

"I shall be with you, dearest, almost as soon as you receive this. The
bearer will tell you what has happened in the village--your note throws
a new light on it all. I only remain behind to go to the vicar (who is
also the magistrate here), and declare myself your husband. All disguise
must be at an end now. My place is with you and yours. It is even worse
than your worst fears. Turlington was at the bottom of the attack on
your father. Judge if you have not need of your husband's protection
after that!--L."

Natalie handed the letter to her aunt, and pointed to the sentence which
asserted Turlington's guilty knowledge of the attempt on Sir Joseph's
life. In silent horror the two women looked at each other, recalling
what had happened earlier in the evening, and understanding it now. The
servant roused them to a sense of present things, by entering on the
narrative of his discoveries in the village.

The place was all astir when he reached it. An old man--a stranger in
Baxdale--had been found lying in the road, close to the church, in a
fit; and the person who had discovered him had been no other than Launce
himself. He had, literally, stumbled over the body of Thomas Wildfang in
the dark, on his way back to his lodgings in the village.

"The gentleman gave the alarm, miss," said the servant, describing the
event, as it had been related to him, "and the man--a huge, big old
man--was carried to the inn. The landlord identified him; he had taken
lodgings at the inn that day, and the constable found valuable property
on him--a purse of money and a gold watch and chain. There was nothing
to show who the money and the watch belonged to. It was only when my
master and the doctor got to the inn that it was known whom he had
robbed and tried to murder. All he let out in his wanderings before they
came was that some person had set him on to do it. He called the person
'Captain,' and sometimes 'Captain Goward.' It was thought--if you
could trust the ravings of a madman--that the fit took him while he
was putting his hand on Sir Joseph's heart to feel if it had stopped
beating. A sort of vision (as I understand it) must have overpowered
him at the moment. They tell me he raved about the sea bursting into the
church yard, and a drowning sailor floating by on a hen-coop; a sailor
who dragged him down to hell by the hair of his head, and such like
horrible nonsense, miss. He was still screeching, at the worst of the
fit, when my master and the doctor came into the room. At sight of one
or other of them--it is thought of Mr. Turlington, seeing that he came
first--he held his peace on a sudden, and then fell back in convulsions
in the arms of the men who were holding him. The doctor gave it a
learned name, signifying drink-madness, and said the case was hopeless.
However, he ordered the room to be cleared of the crowd to see what he
could do. My master was reported to be still with the doctor, waiting to
see whether the man lived or died, when I left the village, miss, with
the gentleman's answer to your note. I didn't dare stay to hear how it
ended, for fear of Mr. Turlington's finding me out."

Having reached the end of his narrative, the man looked round restlessly
toward the window. It was impossible to say when his master might not
return, and it might be as much as his life was worth to be caught in
the house after he had been locked out of it. He begged permission to
open the window, and make his escape back to the stables while there
was still time. As he unbarred the shutter they were startled by a voice
hailing them from below. It was Launce's voice calling to Natalie. The
servant disappeared, and Natalie was in Launce's arms before she could
breathe again.

For one delicious moment she let her head lie on his breast; then she
suddenly pushed him away from her. "Why do you come here? He will kill
you if he finds you in the house. Where is he?"

Launce knew even less of Turlington's movements than the servant.
"Wherever he is, thank God, I am here before him!" That was all the
answer he could give.

Natalie and her aunt heard him in silent dismay. Sir Joseph woke, and
recognized Launce before a word more could be said. "Ah, my dear boy!"
he murmured, faintly. "It's pleasant to see you again. How do you come
here?" He was quite satisfied with the first excuse that suggested
itself. "We'll talk about it to-morrow," he said, and composed himself
to rest again.

Natalie made a second attempt to persuade Launce to leave the house.

"We don't know what may have happened," she said. "He may have followed
you on your way here. He may have purposely let you enter his house.
Leave us while you have the chance."

Miss Lavinia added her persuasions. They were useless. Launce quietly
closed the heavy window-shutters, lined with iron, and put up the bar.
Natalie wrung her hands in despair.

"Have you been to the magistrate?" she asked. "Tell us, at least, are
you here by his advice? Is he coming to help us?"

Launce hesitated. If he had told the truth, he must have acknowledged
that he was there in direct opposition to the magistrate's advice. He
answered evasively, "If the vicar doesn't come, the doctor will. I have
told him Sir Joseph must be moved. Cheer up, Natalie! The doctor will be
here as soon as Turlington."

As the name passed his lips--without a sound outside to prepare them
for what was coming--the voice of Turlington himself suddenly penetrated
into the room, speaking close behind the window, on the outer side.

"You have broken into my house in the night," said the voice. "And you
don't escape _this_ way."

Miss Lavinia sank on her knees. Natalie flew to her father. His eyes
were wide open in terror; he moaned, feebly recognizing the voice.
The next sound that was heard was the sound made by the removal of the
ladder from the balcony. Turlington, having descended by it, had taken
it away. Natalie had but too accurately guessed what would happen. The
death of the villain's accomplice had freed him from all apprehension
in that quarter. He had deliberately dogged Launce's steps, and had
deliberately allowed him to put himself in the wrong by effecting a
secret entrance into the house.

There was an interval--a horrible interval--and then they heard the
front door opened. Without stopping (judging by the absence of sound)
to close it again, Turlington rapidly ascended the stairs and tried the
locked door.

"Come out, and give yourself up!" he called through the door. "I have
got my revolver with me, and I have a right to fire on a man who has
broken into my house. If the door isn't opened before I count three,
your blood be on your own head. One!"

Launce was armed with nothing but his stick. He advanced, without an
instant's hesitation, to give himself up. Natalie threw her arms round
him and clasped him fast before he could reach the door.

"Two!" cried the voice outside, as Launce struggled to force her from
him. At the same moment his eye turned toward the bed. It was exactly
opposite the door--it was straight in the line of fire! Sir Joseph' s
life (as Turlington had deliberately calculated) was actually in greater
danger than Launce's life. He tore himself free, rushed to the bed, and
took the old man in his arms to lift him out.

"Three!"

The crash of the report sounded. The bullet came through the door,
grazed Launce's left arm, and buried itself in the pillow, at the very
place on which Sir Joseph's head had rested the moment before. Launce
had saved his father-in-law's life. Turlington had fired his first shot
for the money, and had not got it yet.

They were safe in the corner of the room, on the same side as the
door--Sir Joseph, helpless as a child, in Launce's arms; the women
pale, but admirably calm. They were safe for the moment, when the second
bullet (fired at an angle) tore its way through the wall on their right
hand.

"I hear you," cried the voice of the miscreant on the other side of the
door. "I'll have you yet--through the wall."

There was a pause. They heard his hand sounding the wall, to find out
where there was solid wood in the material of which it was built, and
where there was plaster only. At that dreadful moment Launce's composure
never left him. He laid Sir Joseph softly on the floor, and signed to
Natalie and her aunt to lie down by him in silence. Their lives depended
now on neither their voices nor their movements telling the murderer
where to fire. He chose his place. The barrel of the revolver grated
as he laid it against the wall. He touched the hair trigger. A faint
_click_ was the only sound that followed. The third barrel had missed
fire.

They heard him ask himself, with an oath, "What's wrong with it now?"

There was a pause of silence.

Was he examining the weapon?

Before they could ask themselves the question, the report of the
exploding charge burst on their ears. It was instantly followed by a
heavy fall. They looked at the opposite wall of the room. No sign of a
bullet there or anywhere.

Launce signed to them not to move yet. They waited, and listened.
Nothing stirred on the landing outside.

Suddenly there was a disturbance of the silence in the lower regions--a
clamor of many voices at the open house door. Had the firing of the
revolver been heard at the vicarage? Yes! They recognized the vicar's
voice among the others. A moment more, and they heard a general
exclamation of horror on the stairs. Launce opened the door of the room.
He instantly closed it again before Natalie could follow him.

The dead body of Turlington lay on the landing outside. The charge in
the fourth barrel of the revolver had exploded while he was looking at
it. The bullet had entered his mouth and killed him on the spot.




DOCUMENTARY HINTS, IN CONCLUSION.

First Hint.

(Derived from Lady Winwood's Card-Rack.)

"Sir Joseph Graybrooke and Miss Graybrooke request the honor of Lord
and Lady Winwood's company to dinner, on Wednesday, February 10, at
half-past seven o'clock. To meet Mr. and Mrs. Launcelot Linzie on their
return."


Second Hint.

(Derived from a recent Money Article in morning Newspaper.)

"We are requested to give the fullest contradiction to unfavorable
rumors lately in circulation respecting the firm of Pizzituti,
Turlington, and Branca. Some temporary derangement in the machinery of
the business was undoubtedly produced in consequence of the sudden death
of the lamented managing partner, Mr. Turlington, by the accidental
discharge of a revolver which he was examining. Whatever temporary
obstacles may have existed are now overcome. We are informed, on good
authority, that the well-known house of Messrs. Bulpit Brothers has an
interest in the business, and will carry it on until further notice."




