
BIOGRAPHIES OF WORKING MEN


by

GRANT ALLEN, B.A.


1884






CONTENTS.


   I.  THOMAS TELFORD, STONEMASON
  II.  GEORGE STEPHENSON, ENGINE-MAN
 III.  JOHN GIBSON, SCULPTOR
  IV.  WILLIAM HERSCHEL, BANDSMAN
   V.  JEAN FRANCOIS MILLET, PAINTER
  VI.  JAMES GARFIELD, CANAL BOY
 VII.  THOMAS EDWARD, SHOEMAKER




PREFACE.


My acknowledgments are due to Dr. Smiles's "Lives of the Engineers,"
"Life of the Stephensons," and "Life of a Scotch Naturalist;" to Lady
Eastlake's "Life of Gibson;" to Mr. Holden's "Life of Sir William
Herschel;" to M. Seusier's "J. F. Millet, Sa Vie et Ses Oeuvres;" and
to Mr. Thayer's "Life of President Garfield;" from which most of the
facts here narrated have been derived.

G.A.




BIOGRAPHIES OF WORKING MEN.




I.

THOMAS TELFORD, STONEMASON.


High up among the heather-clad hills which form the broad dividing
barrier between England and Scotland, the little river Esk brawls and
bickers over its stony bed through a wild land of barren braesides and
brown peat mosses, forming altogether some of the gloomiest and most
forbidding scenery in the whole expanse of northern Britain.  Almost
the entire bulk of the counties of Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, and Ayr is
composed of just such solemn desolate upland wolds, with only a few
stray farms or solitary cottages sprinkled at wide distances over their
bare bleak surface, and with scarcely any sign of life in any part save
the little villages which cluster here and there at long intervals
around some stern and simple Scottish church.  Yet the hardy people who
inhabit this wild and chilly moorland country may well be considered to
rank among the best raw material of society in the whole of Britain;
for from the peasant homes of these southern Scotch Highlands have come
forth, among a host of scarcely less distinguished natives, three men,
at least, who deserve to take their place in the very front line of
British thinkers or workers--Thomas Telford, Robert Burns, and Thomas
Carlyle.  By origin, all three alike belonged in the very strictest
sense to the working classes; and the story of each is full of lessons
or of warnings for every one of us: but that of Telford is perhaps the
most encouraging and the most remarkable of all, as showing how much
may be accomplished by energy and perseverance, even under the most
absolutely adverse and difficult circumstances.

Near the upper end of Eskdale, in the tiny village of Westerkirk, a
young shepherd's wife gave birth to a son on the 9th of August, 1757.
Her husband, John Telford, was employed in tending sheep on a
neighbouring farm, and he and his Janet occupied a small cottage close
by, with mud walls and rudely thatched roof, such as in southern
England even the humblest agricultural labourer would scarcely consent
willingly to inhabit.  Before the child was three months old, his
father died; and Janet Telford was left alone in the world with her
unweaned baby.  But in remote country districts, neighbours are often
more neighbourly than in great towns; and a poor widow can manage to
eke out a livelihood for herself with an occasional lift from the
helping hands of friendly fellow-villagers.  Janet Telford had nothing
to live upon save her own ten fingers; but they were handy enough,
after the sturdy Scotch fashion, and they earned some sort of
livelihood in a humble way for herself and her fatherless boy.  The
farmers about found her work on their farms at haymaking or milking,
and their wives took the child home with them while its mother was busy
labouring in the harvest fields.  Amid such small beginnings did the
greatest of English engineers before the railway era receive his first
hard lessons in the art of life.

After her husband's death, the poor widow removed from her old cottage
to a still more tiny hut, which she shared with a neighbour--a very
small hut, with a single door for both families; and here young Tam
Telford spent most of his boyhood in the quiet honourable poverty of
the uncomplaining rural poor.  As soon as he was big enough to herd
sheep, he was turned out upon the hillside in summer like any other
ragged country laddie, and in winter he tended cows, receiving for
wages only his food and money enough to cover the cost of his scanty
clothing.  He went to school, too; how, nobody now knows: but he DID
go, to the parish school of Westerkirk, and there he learnt with a
will, in the winter months, though he had to spend the summer on the
more profitable task of working in the fields.  To a steady earnest boy
like young Tam Telford, however, it makes all the difference in the
world that he should have been to school, no matter how simply.  Those
twenty-six letters of the alphabet, once fairly learnt, are the key,
after all, to all the book-learning in the whole world.  Without them,
the shepherd-boy might remain an ignorant, unprogressive shepherd all
his life long, even his undeniable native energy using itself up on
nothing better than a wattled hurdle or a thatched roof; with them, the
path is open before him which led Tam Telford at last to the Menai
Bridge And Westminster Abbey.

When Tam had gradually eaten his way through enough thin oatmeal
porridge (with very little milk, we fear) to make him into a hearty lad
of fifteen, it began to be high time for him to choose himself a final
profession in life, such as he was able.  And here already the born
tastes of the boy began to show themselves: for he had no liking for
the homely shepherd's trade; he felt a natural desire for a chisel and
a hammer--the engineer was there already in the grain--and he was
accordingly apprenticed to a stonemason in the little town of
Lochmaben, beyond the purple hills to eastward.  But his master was a
hard man; he had small mercy for the raw lad; and after trying to
manage with him for a few months, Tam gave it up, took the law into his
own hands, and ran away.  Probably the provocation was severe, for in
after-life Telford always showed himself duly respectful to constituted
authority; and we know that petty self-made master-workmen are often
apt to be excessively severe to their own hired helpers, and especially
to helpless lads or young apprentices.  At any rate, Tam wouldn't go
back; and in the end, a well-to-do cousin, who had risen to the proud
position of steward at the great hall of the parish, succeeded in
getting another mason at Langholm, the little capital of Eskdale, to
take over the runaway for the remainder of the term of his indentures.

At Langholm, a Scotch country town of the quietest and sleepiest
description, Tam Telford passed the next eight years of his uneventful
early life, first as an apprentice, and afterwards as a journeyman
mason of the humblest type.  He had a good mother, and he was a good
son.  On Saturday nights he generally managed to walk over to the
cottage at Westerkirk, and accompany the poor widow to the Sunday
services at the parish kirk.  As long as she lived, indeed, he never
forgot her; and one of the first tasks he set himself when he was out
of his indentures was to cut a neat headstone with a simple but
beautiful inscription for the grave of that shepherd father whom he had
practically never seen.  At Langholm, an old maiden lady, Miss Pasley,
interested herself kindly in Janet Telford's rising boy.  She lent him
what of all things the eager lad most needed--books; and the young
mason applied himself to them in all his spare moments with the
vigorous ardour and perseverance of healthy youth.  The books he read
were not merely those which bore directly or indirectly upon his own
craft: if they had been, Tam Telford might have remained nothing more
than a journeyman mason all the days of his life.  It is a great
mistake, even from the point of view of mere worldly success, for a
young man to read or learn only what "pays" in his particular calling;
the more he reads and learns, the more will he find that seemingly
useless things "pay" in the end, and that what apparently pays least,
often really pays most in the long run.  This is not the only or the
best reason why every man should aim at the highest possible
cultivation of his own talents, be they what they may; but it is in
itself a very good reason, and it is a sufficient answer for those who
would deter us from study of any high kind on the ground that it "does
no good."  Telford found in after-life that his early acquaintance with
sound English literature did do him a great deal of good: it opened and
expanded his mind; it trained his intelligence; it stored his brain
with images and ideas which were ever after to him a source of
unmitigated delight and unalloyed pleasure.  He read whenever he had
nothing else to do.  He read Milton with especial delight; and he also
read the verses that his fellow-countryman, Rob Burns, the Ayrshire
ploughman, was then just beginning to speak straight to the heart of
every aspiring Scotch peasant lad.  With these things Tam Telford
filled the upper stories of his brain quite as much as with the trade
details of his own particular useful handicraft; and the result soon
showed that therein Tam Telford had not acted uncannily or unwisely.

Nor did he read only; he wrote too--verses, not very good, nor yet very
bad, but well expressed, in fairly well chosen language, and with due
regard to the nice laws of metre and of grammar, which is in itself a
great point.  Writing verse is an occupation at which only very few
even among men of literary education ever really succeed; and
nine-tenths of published verse is mere mediocre twaddle, quite unworthy
of being put into the dignity of print. Yet Telford did well for all
that in trying his hand, with but poor result, at this most difficult
and dangerous of all the arts.  His rhymes were worth nothing as
rhymes; but they were worth a great deal as discipline and training:
they helped to form the man, and that in itself is always something.
Most men who have in them the power to do any great thing pass in early
life through a verse-making stage.  The verses never come to much; but
they leave their stamp behind them; and the man is all the better in
the end for having thus taught himself the restraint, the command of
language, the careful choice of expressions, the exercise of deliberate
pains in composition, which even bad verse-making necessarily implies.
It is a common mistake of near-sighted minds to look only at the
immediate results of things, without considering their remoter effects.
When Tam Telford, stonemason of Langholm, began at twenty-two years of
age to pen poetical epistles to Robert Burns, most of his
fellow-workmen doubtless thought he was giving himself up to very
foolish and nonsensical practices; but he was really helping to educate
Thomas Telford, engineer of the Holyhead Road and the Caledonian Canal,
for all his future usefulness and greatness.

As soon as Tam was out of his indentures, he began work as a journeyman
mason at Langholm on his own account, at the not very magnificent wages
of eighteenpence a day.  That isn't much; but at any rate it is an
independence.  Besides building many houses in his own town, Tam made
here his first small beginning in the matter of roads and highways, by
helping to build a bridge over the Esk at Langholm.  He was very proud
of his part in this bridge, and to the end of his life he often
referred to it as his first serious engineering work.  Many of the
stones still bear his private mark, hewn with the tool into their solid
surface, with honest workmanship which helps to explain his later
success.  But the young mason was beginning to discover that Eskdale
was hardly a wide enough field for his budding ambition.  He could
carve the most careful headstones; he could cut the most ornamental
copings for doors or windows; he could even build a bridge across the
roaring flooded Esk; but he wanted to see a little of the great world,
and learn how men and masons went about their work in the busy centres
of the world's activity.  So, like a patriotic Scotchman that he was,
he betook himself straight to Edinburgh, tramping it on foot, of
course, for railways did not yet exist, and coaches were not for the
use of such as young Thomas Telford.

He arrived in the grey old capital of Scotland in the very nick of
time.  The Old Town, a tangle of narrow alleys and close courtyards,
surrounded by tall houses with endless tiers of floors, was just being
deserted by the rich and fashionable world for the New Town, which lies
beyond a broad valley on the opposite hillside, and contains numerous
streets of solid and handsome stone houses, such as are hardly to be
found in any other town in Britain, except perhaps Bath and Aberdeen.
Edinburgh is always, indeed, an interesting place for an enthusiastic
lover of building, be he architect or stonemason; for instead of being
built of brick like London and so many other English centres, it is
built partly of a fine hard local sandstone and partly of basaltic
greenstone; and besides its old churches and palaces, many of the
public buildings are particularly striking and beautiful architectural
works.  But just at the moment when young Telford walked wearily into
Edinburgh at the end of his long tramp, there was plenty for a stout
strong mason to do in the long straight stone fronts of the rising New
Town.  For two years, he worked away patiently at his trade in "the
grey metropolis of the North;" and he took advantage of the special
opportunities the place afforded him to learn drawing, and to make
minute sketches in detail of Holyrood Palace, Heriot's Hospital, Roslyn
Chapel, and all the other principal old buildings' in which the
neighbourhood of the capital is particularly rich.  So anxious, indeed,
was the young mason to perfect himself by the study of the very best
models in his own craft, that when at the end of two years he walked
back to revisit his good mother in Eskdale, he took the opportunity of
making drawings of Melrose Abbey, the most exquisite and graceful
building that the artistic stone-cutters of the Middle Ages have handed
down to our time in all Scotland.

This visit to Eskdale was really Telford's last farewell to his old
home, before setting out on a journey which was to form the
turning-point in his own history, and in the history of British
engineering as well.  In Scotch phrase, he was going south.  And after
taking leave of his mother (not quite for the last time) he went south
in good earnest, doing this journey on horseback; for his cousin the
steward had lent him a horse to make his way southward like a
gentleman.  Telford turned where all enterprising young Scotchmen of
his time always turned: towards the unknown world of London--that world
teeming with so many possibilities of brilliant success or of miserable
squalid failure.  It was the year 1782, and the young man was just
twenty-five.  No sooner had he reached the great city than he began
looking about him for suitable work.  He had a letter of introduction
to the architect of Somerset House, whose ornamental fronts were just
then being erected, facing the Strand and the river; and Telford was
able to get a place at once on the job as a hewer of the finer
architectural details, for which both his taste and experience well
fitted him.  He spent some two years in London at this humble post as a
stone-cutter; but already he began to aspire to something better.  He
earned first-class mason's wages now, and saved whatever he did not
need for daily expenses.  In this respect, the improvidence of his
English fellow-workmen struck the cautious young Scotchman very
greatly. They lived, he said, from week to week entirely; any time
beyond a week seemed unfortunately to lie altogether outside the range
of their limited comprehension.

At the end of two years in London, Telford's skill and study began to
bear good fruit.  His next engagement was one which raised him for the
first time in his life above the rank of a mere journeyman mason.  The
honest workman had attracted the attention of competent judges.  He
obtained employment as foreman of works of some important buildings in
Portsmouth Dockyard.  A proud man indeed was Thomas Telford at this
change of fortune, and very proudly he wrote to his old friends in
Eskdale, with almost boyish delight, about the trust reposed in him by
the commissioners and officers, and the pains he was taking with the
task entrusted to him.  For he was above all things a good workman, and
like all good workmen he felt a pride and an interest in all the jobs
he took in hand.  His sense of responsibility and his sensitiveness,
indeed, were almost too great at times for his own personal comfort.
Things WILL go wrong now and then, even with the greatest care;
well-planned undertakings will not always pay, and the best engineering
does not necessarily succeed in earning a dividend; but whenever such
mishaps occurred to his employers, Telford felt the disappointment much
too keenly, as though he himself had been to blame for their
miscalculations or over-sanguine hopes.  Still, it is a good thing to
put one's heart in one's work, and so much Thomas Telford certainly did.

About this time, too, the rising young mason began to feel that he must
get a little more accurate scientific knowledge.  The period for
general study had now passed by, and the period for special trade
reading had set in.  This was well.  A lad cannot do better than lay a
good foundation of general knowledge and general literature during the
period when he is engaged in forming his mind: a young man once fairly
launched in life may safely confine himself for a time to the studies
that bear directly upon his own special chosen subject.  The thing that
Telford began closely to investigate was--lime.  Now, lime makes
mortar; and without lime, accordingly, you can have no mason.  But to
know anything really about lime, Telford found he must read some
chemistry; and to know anything really about chemistry he must work at
it hard and unremittingly.  A strict attention to one's own business,
understood in this very broad and liberal manner, is certainly no bad
thing for any struggling handicraftsman, whatever his trade or
profession may happen to be.

In 1786, when Telford was nearly thirty, a piece of unexpected good
luck fell to his lot.  And yet it was not so much good luck as due
recognition of his sterling qualities by a wealthy and appreciative
person.  Long before, while he was still in Eskdale, one Mr. Pulteney,
a man of social importance, who had a large house in the bleak northern
valley, had asked his advice about the repairs of his own mansion.  We
may be sure that Telford did his work on that occasion carefully and
well; for now, when Mr. Pulteney wished to restore the ruins of
Shrewsbury Castle as a dwelling-house, he sought out the young mason
who had attended to his Scotch property, and asked him to superintend
the proposed alterations in his Shropshire castle.  Nor was that all:
by Mr. Pulteney's influence, Telford was shortly afterwards appointed
to be county surveyor of public works, having under his care all the
roads, bridges, gaols, and public buildings in the whole of Shropshire.
Thus the Eskdale shepherd-boy rose at last from the rank of a working
mason, and attained the well-earned dignity of an engineer and a
professional man.

Telford had now a fair opportunity of showing the real stuff of which
he was made.  Those, of course, were the days when railroads had not
yet been dreamt of; when even roads were few and bad; when
communications generally were still in a very disorderly and
unorganized condition.  It is Telford's special glory that he reformed
and altered this whole state of things; he reduced the roads of half
Britain to system and order; he made the finest highways and bridges
then ever constructed; and by his magnificent engineering works,
especially his aqueducts, he paved the way unconsciously but surely for
the future railways.  If it had not been for such great undertakings as
Telford's Holyhead Road, which familiarized men's minds with costly
engineering operations, it is probable that projectors would long have
stood aghast at the alarming expense of a nearly level iron road
running through tall hills and over broad rivers the whole way from
London to Manchester.

At first, Telford's work as county surveyor lay mostly in very small
things indeed--mere repairs of sidepaths or bridges, which gave him
little opportunity to develop his full talents as a born engineer.  But
in time, being found faithful in small things, his employers, the
county magistrates, began to consult him more and more on matters of
comparative importance.  First, it was a bridge to be built across the
Severn; then a church to be planned at Shrewsbury, and next, a second
church in Coalbrookdale.  If he was thus to be made suddenly into an
architect, Telford thought, almost without being consulted in the
matter, he must certainly set out to study architecture.  So, with
characteristic vigour, he went to work to visit London, Worcester,
Gloucester, Bath, and Oxford, at each place taking care to learn
whatever was to be learned in the practice of his new art.
Fortunately, however, for Telford and for England, it was not
architecture in the strict sense that he was finally to practise as a
real profession.  Another accident, as thoughtless people might call
it, led him to adopt engineering in the end as the path in life he
elected to follow.  In 1793, he was appointed engineer to the projected
Ellesmere Canal.

In the days before railways, such a canal as this was an engineering
work of the very first importance.  It was to connect the Mersey, the
Dee, and the Severn, and it passed over ground which rendered necessary
some immense aqueducts on a scale never before attempted by British
engineers.  Even in our own time, every traveller by the Great Western
line between Chester and Shrewsbury must have observed on his right two
magnificent ranges as high arches, which are as noticeable now as ever
for their boldness, their magnitude, and their exquisite construction.
The first of these mighty archways is the Pont Cysylltau aqueduct which
carries the Ellesmere Canal across the wide valley of the Dee, known as
the Vale of Llangollen; the second is the Chirk aqueduct, which takes
it over the lesser glen of a minor tributary, the Ceriog.  Both these
beautiful works were designed and carried out entirely by Telford.
They differ from many other great modern engineering achievements in
the fact that, instead of spoiling the lovely mountain scenery into
whose midst they have been thrown, they actually harmonize with it and
heighten its natural beauty.  Both works, however, are splendid feats,
regarded merely as efforts of practical skill; and the larger one is
particularly memorable for the peculiarity that the trough for the
water and the elegant parapet at the side are both entirely composed of
iron.  Nowadays, of course, there would be nothing remarkable in the
use of such a material for such a purpose; but Telford was the first
engineer to see the value of iron in this respect, and the Pont
Cysylltau aqueduct was one of the earliest works in which he applied
the new material to these unwonted uses.  Such a step is all the more
remarkable, because Telford's own education had lain entirely in what
may fairly be called the "stone age" of English engineering; while his
natural predilections as a stonemason might certainly have made him
rather overlook the value of the novel material.  But Telford was a man
who could rise superior to such little accidents of habit or training;
and as a matter of fact there is no other engineer to whom the rise of
the present "iron age" in engineering work is more directly and
immediately to be attributed than to himself.

Meanwhile, the Eskdale pioneer did not forget his mother.  For years he
had constantly written to her, in PRINT HAND, so that the letters might
be more easily read by her aged eyes; he had sent her money in full
proportion to his means; and he had taken every possible care to let
her declining years be as comfortable as his altered circumstances
could readily make them.  And now, in the midst of this great and
responsible work, he found time to "run down" to Eskdale (very
different "running down" from that which we ourselves can do by the
London and North Western Railway), to see his aged mother once more
before she died.  What a meeting that must have been, between the poor
old widow of the Eskdale shepherd, and her successful son, the county
surveyor of Shropshire, and engineer of the great and important
Ellesmere Canal!

While Telford was working busily upon his wonderful canal, he had many
other schemes to carry out of hardly less importance, in connection
with his appointment as county surveyor.  His beautiful iron bridge
across the Severn at Buildwas was another application of his favourite
metal to the needs of the new world that was gradually growing up in
industrial England; and so satisfied was he with the result of his
experiment (for though not absolutely the first, it was one of the
first iron bridges ever built) that he proposed another magnificent
idea, which unfortunately was never carried into execution.  Old London
Bridge had begun to get a trifle shaky; and instead of rebuilding it,
Telford wished to span the whole river by a single iron arch, whose
splendid dimensions would have formed one of the most remarkable
engineering triumphs ever invented.  The scheme, for some good reason,
doubtless, was not adopted; but it is impossible to look at Telford's
grand drawing of the proposed bridge--a single bold arch, curving
across the Thames from side to side, with the dome of St. Paul's rising
majestically above it--without a feeling of regret that such a noble
piece of theoretical architecture was never realized in actual fact.

Telford had now come to be regarded as the great practical authority
upon all that concerned roads or communications; and he was reaping the
due money-reward of his diligence and skill.  Every day he was called
upon to design new bridges and other important structures in all parts
of the kingdom, but more especially in Scotland and on the Welsh
border.  Many of the most picturesque bridges in Britain, which every
tourist has admired, often without inquiring or thinking of the hand
that planned them, were designed by his inventive brain.  The exquisite
stone arch which links the two banks of the lesser Scotch Dee in its
gorge at Tongueland is one of the most picturesque; for Telford was a
bit of an artist at heart, and, unlike too many modern railway
constructors, he always endeavoured to make his bridges and aqueducts
beautify rather than spoil the scenery in whose midst they stood.
Especially was he called in to lay out the great system of roads by
which the Scotch Highlands, then so lately reclaimed from a state of
comparative barbarism, were laid open for the great development they
have since undergone.  In the earlier part of the century, it is true,
a few central highways had been run through the very heart of that
great solid block of mountains; but these were purely military roads,
to enable the king's soldiers more easily to march against the revolted
clans, and they had hardly more connection with the life of the country
than the bare military posts, like Fort William and Fort Augustus,
which guarded their ends, had to do with the ordinary life of a
commercial town.  Meanwhile, however, the Highlands had begun gradually
to settle down; and Telford's roads were intended for the far higher
and better purpose of opening out the interior of northern Scotland to
the humanizing influences of trade and industry.

Fully to describe the great work which the mature engineer constructed
in the Highland region, would take up more space than could be allotted
to such a subject anywhere save in a complete industrial history of
roads and travelling in modern Britain.  It must suffice to say that
when Telford took the matter in hand, the vast block of country north
and west of the Great Glen of Caledonia (which divides the Highlands in
two between Inverness and Ben Nevis)--a block comprising the counties
of Caithness, Sutherland, Ross, Cromarty, and half Inverness--had
literally nothing within it worthy of being called a road.  Wheeled
carts or carriages were almost unknown, and all burdens were conveyed
on pack-horses, or, worse still, on the broad backs of Highland
lassies.  The people lived in small scattered villages, and
communications from one to another were well-nigh impossible.  Telford
set to work to give the country, not a road or two, but a main system
of roads.  First, he bridged the broad river Tay at Dunkeld, so as to
allow of a direct route straight into the very jaws of the Highlands.
Then, he also bridged over the Beauly at Inverness, so as to connect
the opposite sides of the Great Glen with one another.  Next, he laid
out a number of trunk lines, running through the country on both banks,
to the very north of Caithness, and the very west of the Isle of Skye.
Whoever to this day travels on the main thoroughfares in the greater
Scottish Islands--in Arran, Islay, Jura, Mull; or in the wild peninsula
of Morvern, and the Land of Lorne; or through the rugged regions of
Inverness-shire and Ross-shire, where the railway has not yet
penetrated,--travels throughout on Telford's roads. The number of large
bridges and other great engineering masterpieces on this network of
roads is enormous; among the most famous and the most beautiful, are
the exquisite single arch which spans the Spey just beside the lofty
rearing rocks of Craig Ellachie, and the bridge across the Dee, beneath
the purple heather-clad braes of Ballater.  Altogether, on Telford's
Highland roads alone, there are no fewer than twelve hundred bridges.

Nor were these the only important labours by which Telford ministered
to the comfort and well-being of his Scotch fellow-countrymen.
Scotland's debt to the Eskdale stonemason is indeed deep and lasting.
While on land, he improved her communications by his great lines of
roads, which did on a smaller scale for the Highland valleys what
railways have since done for the whole of the civilized world; he also
laboured to improve her means of transit at sea by constructing a
series of harbours along that bare and inhospitable eastern coast, once
almost a desert, but now teeming with great towns and prosperous
industries.  It was Telford who formed the harbour of Wick, which has
since grown from a miserable fishing village into a large town, the
capital of the North Sea herring fisheries.  It was he who enlarged the
petty port of Peterhead into the chief station of the flourishing
whaling trade. It was he who secured prosperity for Fraserburgh, and
Banff, and many other less important centres; while even Dundee and
Aberdeen, the chief commercial cities of the east coast, owe to him a
large part of their present extraordinary wealth and industry.  When
one thinks how large a number of human beings have been benefited by
Telford's Scotch harbour works alone, it is impossible not to envy a
great engineer his almost unlimited power of permanent usefulness to
unborn thousands of his fellow-creatures.

As a canal-maker, Telford was hardly less successful than as a
constructor of roads and harbours.  It is true, his greatest work in
this direction was in one sense a failure.  He was employed by
Government for many years as the engineer of the Caledonian Canal,
which runs up the Great Glen of Caledonia, connecting the line of lakes
whose basins occupy that deep hollow in the Highland ranges, and so
avoiding the difficult and dangerous sea voyage round the stormy
northern capes of Caithness.  Unfortunately, though the canal as an
engineering work proved to be of the most successful character, it has
never succeeded as a commercial undertaking.  It was built just at the
exact moment when steamboats were on the point of revolutionizing ocean
traffic; and so, though in itself a magnificent and lordly undertaking,
it failed to satisfy the sanguine hopes of its projectors.  But though
Telford felt most bitterly the unavoidable ill success of this great
scheme, he might well have comforted himself by the good results of his
canal-building elsewhere.  He went to Sweden to lay out the Gotha
Canal, which still forms the main high-road of commerce between
Stockholm and the sea; while in England itself some of his works in
this direction--such as the improvements on the Birmingham Canal, with
its immense tunnel--may fairly be considered as the direct precursors
of the great railway efforts of the succeeding generation.

The most remarkable of all Telford's designs, however, and the one
which most immediately paved the way for the railway system, was his
magnificent Holyhead Road.  This wonderful highway he carried through
the very midst of the Welsh mountains, at a comparatively level height
for its whole distance, in order to form a main road from London to
Ireland.  On this road occurs Telford's masterpiece of engineering, the
Menai suspension bridge, long regarded as one of the wonders of the
world, and still one of the most beautiful suspension bridges in all
Europe.  Hardly less admirable, however, in its own way is the other
suspension bridge which he erected at Conway, to carry his road across
the mouth of the estuary, beside the grey old castle, with which its
charming design harmonizes so well.  Even now it is impossible to drive
or walk along this famous and picturesque highway without being struck
at every turn by the splendid engineering triumphs which it displays
throughout its entire length.  The contrast, indeed, between the noble
grandeur of Telford's bridges, and the works on the neighbouring
railways, is by no means flattering in every respect to our too
exclusively practical modern civilization.

Telford was now growing an old man.  The Menai bridge was begun in 1819
and finished in 1826, when he was sixty-eight years of age; and though
he still continued to practise his profession, and to design many
valuable bridges, drainage cuts, and other small jobs, that great
undertaking was the last masterpiece of his long and useful life.  His
later days were passed in deserved honour and comparative opulence; for
though never an avaricious man, and always anxious to rate his services
at their lowest worth, he had gathered together a considerable fortune
by the way, almost without seeking it.  To the last, his happy cheerful
disposition enabled him to go on labouring at the numerous schemes by
which he hoped to benefit the world of workers; and so much
cheerfulness was surely well earned by a man who could himself look
back upon so good a record of work done for the welfare of humanity.
At last, on the 2nd of September, 1834, his quiet and valuable life
came gently to a close, in the seventy-eighth year of his age.  He was
buried in Westminster Abbey, and few of the men who sleep within that
great national temple more richly deserve the honour than the
Westerkirk shepherd-boy.  For Thomas Telford's life was not merely one
of worldly success; it was still more pre-eminently one of noble ends
and public usefulness.  Many working men have raised themselves by
their own exertions to a position of wealth and dignity far surpassing
his; few indeed have conferred so many benefits upon untold thousands
of their fellow-men.  It is impossible, even now, to travel in any part
of England, Wales, or Scotland, without coming across innumerable
memorials of Telford's great and useful life; impossible to read the
full record of his labours without finding that numberless structures
we have long admired for their beauty or utility, owe their origin to
the honourable, upright, hardworking, thorough-going, journeyman mason
of the quiet little Eskdale village.  Whether we go into the drained
fens of Lincolnshire, or traverse the broad roads of the rugged Snowdon
region; whether we turn to St. Katharine's Docks in London, or to the
wide quays of Dundee and those of Aberdeen; whether we sail beneath the
Menai suspension bridge at Bangor, or drive over the lofty arches that
rise sheer from the precipitous river gorge at Cartland, we meet
everywhere the lasting traces of that inventive and ingenious brain.
And yet, what lad could ever have started in the world under apparently
more hopeless circumstances than widow Janet Telford's penniless orphan
shepherd-boy Tam, in the bleakest and most remote of all the lonely
border valleys of southern Scotland?




II.

GEORGE STEPHENSON, ENGINE-MAN.


Any time about the year 1786, a stranger in the streets of the grimy
colliery village of Wylam, near Newcastle, might have passed by without
notice a ragged, barefooted, chubby child of five years old, Geordie
Stephenson by name, playing merrily in the gutter and looking to the
outward eye in no way different from any of the other colliers'
children who loitered about him.  Nevertheless, that ragged boy was yet
destined in after-life to alter the whole face of England and the world
by those wonderful railways, which he more than any other man was
instrumental in first constructing; and the story of his life may rank
perhaps as one of the most marvellous in the whole marvellous history
of able and successful British working men.

George Stephenson was born in June, 1781, the son of a fireman who
tended the pumping engine of the neighbouring colliery, and one of a
penniless family of six children.  So poor was his father, indeed, that
the whole household lived in a single room, with bare floor and mud
wall; and little Geordie grew up in his own unkempt fashion without any
schooling whatever, not even knowing A from B when he was a big lad of
seventeen.  At an age when he ought to have been learning his letters,
he was bird's-nesting in the fields or running errands to the Wylam
shops; and as soon as he was old enough to earn a few pence by light
work, he was set to tend cows at the magnificent wages of twopence a
day, in the village of Dewley Burn, close by, to which his father had
then removed.  It might have seemed at first as though the future
railway engineer was going to settle down quietly to the useful but
uneventful life of an agricultural labourer; for from tending cows he
proceeded in due time (with a splendid advance of twopence) to leading
the horses at the plough, spudding thistles, and hoeing turnips on his
employer's farm.  But the native bent of a powerful mind usually shows
itself very early; and even during the days when Geordie was still
stumbling across the freshly ploughed clods or driving the cows to
pasture with a bunch of hazel twigs, his taste for mechanics already
made itself felt in a very marked and practical fashion.  During all
his leisure time, the future engineer and his chum Bill Thirlwall
occupied themselves with making clay models of engines, and fitting up
a winding machine with corks and twine like those which lifted the
colliery baskets.  Though Geordie Stephenson didn't go to school at the
village teacher's, he was teaching himself in his own way by close
observation and keen comprehension of all the machines and engines he
could come across.

Naturally, to such a boy, the great ambition of his life was to be
released from the hoeing and spudding, and set to work at his father's
colliery.  Great was Geordie's joy, therefore, when at last he was
taken on there in the capacity of a coal-picker, to clear the loads
from stones and rubbish.  It wasn't a very dignified position, to be
sure, but it was the first step that led the way to the construction of
the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.  Geordie was now fairly free from
the uncongenial drudgery of farm life, and able to follow his own
inclinations in the direction of mechanical labour.  Besides, was he
not earning the grand sum of sixpence a day as picker, increased to
eightpence a little later on, when he rose to the more responsible and
serious work of driving the gin-horse?  A proud day indeed it was for
him when, at fourteen, he was finally permitted to aid his father in
firing the colliery engine; though he was still such a very small boy
that he used to run away and hide when the owner went his rounds of
inspection, for fear he should be thought too little to earn his untold
wealth of a shilling a day in such a grown-up occupation.  Humbler
beginnings were never any man's who lived to become the honoured guest,
not of kings and princes only, but of the truly greatest and noblest in
the land.

A coal-miner's life is often a very shifting one; for the coal in
particular collieries gets worked out from time to time; and he has to
remove, accordingly, to fresh quarters, wherever employment happens to
be found.  This was very much the case with George Stephenson and his
family; all of them being obliged to remove several times over during
his childish days in search of new openings.  Shortly after Geordie had
attained to the responsible position of assistant fireman, his father
was compelled, by the closing of Dewley Burn mine, to get a fresh
situation hard by at Newburn.  George accompanied him, and found
employment as full fireman at a small working, whose little engine he
undertook to manage in partnership with a mate, each of them tending
the fire night and day by twelve-hour shifts.  Two years later, his
wages were raised to twelve shillings a week, a sure mark of his
diligent and honest work; so that George was not far wrong in remarking
to a fellow-workman at the time that he now considered himself a made
man for life.

During all this time, George Stephenson never for a moment ceased to
study and endeavour to understand the working of every part in the
engine that he tended.  He was not satisfied, as too many workmen are,
with merely learning the routine work of his own trade; with merely
knowing that he must turn such and such a tap or valve in order to
produce such and such a desired result: he wanted to see for himself
how and why the engine did this or that, what was the use and object of
piston and cylinder and crank and joint and condenser--in short, fully
to understand the underlying principle of its construction.  He took it
to pieces for cleaning whenever it was needful; he made working models
of it after his old childish pattern; he even ventured to tinker it up
when out of order on his own responsibility.  Thus he learnt at last
something of the theory of the steam-engine, and learnt also by the way
a great deal about the general principles of mechanical science. Still,
even now, incredible as it seems, the future father of railways
couldn't yet read; and he found this terrible drawback told fatally
against his further progress.  Whenever he wanted to learn something
that he didn't quite understand, he was always referred for information
to a Book.  Oh, those books; those mysterious, unattainable,
incomprehensible books; how they must have bothered and worried poor
intelligent and aspiring but still painfully ignorant young George
Stephenson!  Though he was already trying singularly valuable
experiments in his own way, he hadn't yet even begun to learn his
letters.

Under these circumstances, George Stephenson, eager and anxious for
further knowledge, took a really heroic resolution.  He wasn't ashamed
to go to school.  Though now a full workman on his own account, about
eighteen years old, he began to attend the night school at the
neighbouring village of Walbottle, where he took lessons in reading
three evenings every week.  It is a great thing when a man is not
ashamed to learn.  Many men are; they consider themselves so immensely
wise that they look upon it as an impertinence in anybody to try to
tell them anything they don't know already.  Truly wise or truly great
men--men with the capability in them for doing anything worthy in their
generation--never feel this false and foolish shame.  They know that
most other people know some things in some directions which they do
not, and they are glad to be instructed in them whenever opportunity
offers. This wisdom George Stephenson possessed in sufficient degree to
make him feel more ashamed of his ignorance than of the steps necessary
in order to conquer it.  Being a diligent and willing scholar, he soon
learnt to read, and by the time he was nineteen he had learnt how to
write also.  At arithmetic, a science closely allied to his native
mechanical bent, he was particularly apt, and beat all the other
scholars at the village night school.  This resolute effort at
education was the real turning-point in George Stephenson's remarkable
career, the first step on the ladder whose topmost rung led him so high
that he himself must almost have felt giddy at the unwonted elevation.

Shortly after, young Stephenson gained yet another promotion in being
raised to the rank of brakesman, whose duty it was to slacken the
engine when the full baskets of coal reached the top of the shaft.
This was a more serious and responsible post than any he had yet
filled, and one for which only the best and steadiest workmen were ever
selected.  His wages now amounted to a pound a week, a very large sum
in those days for a skilled working-man.

Meanwhile, George, like most other young men, had fallen in love. His
sweetheart, Fanny Henderson, was servant at the small farmhouse where
he had taken lodgings since leaving his father's home; and though but
little is known about her (for she unhappily died before George had
begun to rise to fame and fortune), what little we do know seems to
show that she was in every respect a fitting wife for the active young
brakesman, and a fitting mother for his equally celebrated son, Robert
Stephenson.  Fired by the honourable desire to marry Fanny, with a
proper regard for prudence, George set himself to work to learn
cobbling in his spare moments; and so successfully did he cobble the
worn shoes of his fellow-colliers after working hours, that before long
he contrived to save a whole guinea out of his humble earnings.  That
guinea was the first step towards an enormous fortune; a fortune, too,
all accumulated by steady toil and constant useful labour for the
ultimate benefit of his fellow-men.  To make a fortune is the smallest
and least noble of all possible personal ambitions; but to save the
first guinea which leads us on at last to independence and modest
comfort is indeed an important turning-point in every prudent man's
career. Geordie Stephenson was so justly proud of his achievement in
this respect that he told a friend in confidence he might now consider
himself a rich man.

By the time George was twenty-one, he had saved up enough by constant
care to feel that he might safely embark on the sea of housekeeping.
He was able to take a small cottage lodging for himself and Fanny, at
Willington Quay, near his work at the moment, and to furnish it with
the simple comfort which was all that their existing needs demanded.
He married Fanny on the 28th of November, 1802; and the young couple
proceeded at once to their new home. Here George laboured harder than
ever, as became the head of a family.  He was no more ashamed of odd
jobs than he had been of learning the alphabet.  He worked overtime at
emptying ballast from ships; he continued to cobble, to cut lasts, and
even to try his hand at regular shoemaking; furthermore, he actually
acquired the art of mending clocks, a matter which lay strictly in his
own line, and he thus earned a tidy penny at odd hours by doctoring all
the rusty or wheezy old timepieces of all his neighbours.  Nor did he
neglect his mechanical education meanwhile for he was always at work
upon various devices for inventing a perpetual motion machine. Now,
perpetual motion is the most foolish will-o'-the-wisp that ever engaged
a sane man's attention: the thing has been proved to be impossible from
every conceivable point of view, and the attempt to achieve it, if
pursued to the last point, can only end in disappointment if not in
ruin.  Still, for all that, the work George Stephenson spent upon this
unpractical object did really help to give him an insight into
mechanical science which proved very useful to him at a later date.  He
didn't discover perpetual motion, but he did invent at last the real
means for making the locomotive engine a practical power in the matter
of travelling.

A year later, George's only son Robert was born; and from that moment
the history of those two able and useful lives is almost inseparable.
During the whole of George Stephenson's long upward struggle, and
during the hard battle he had afterwards to fight on behalf of his
grand design of railways, he met with truer sympathy, appreciation, and
comfort from his brave and gifted son than from any other person
whatsoever.  Unhappily, his pleasure and delight in the up-bringing of
his boy was soon to be clouded for a while by the one great bereavement
of an otherwise singularly placid and happy existence.  Some two years
after her marriage, Fanny Stephenson died, as yet a mere girl, leaving
her lonely husband to take care of their baby boy alone and unaided.
Grief for this irretrievable loss drove the young widower away for a
while from his accustomed field of work among the Tyneside coal-pits;
he accepted an invitation to go to Montrose in Scotland, to overlook
the working of a large engine in some important spinning-works.  He
remained in this situation for one year only; but during that time he
managed to give clear evidence of his native mechanical insight by
curing a defect in the pumps which supplied water to his engine, and
which had hitherto defied the best endeavours of the local engineers.
The young father was not unmindful, either, of his duty to his boy,
whom he had left behind with his grandfather on Tyneside; for he saved
so large a sum as 28 pounds during his engagement, which he carried
back with him in his pocket on his return to England.

A sad disappointment awaited him when at last he arrived at home. Old
Robert Stephenson, the father, had met with an accident during George's
absence which made him quite blind, and incapacitated him for further
work.  Helpless and poor, he had no resource to save him from the
workhouse except George; but George acted towards him exactly as all
men who have in them a possibility of any good thing always do act
under similar circumstances.  He spent 15 pounds of his hard-earned
savings to pay the debts the poor blind old engine-man had necessarily
contracted during his absence, and he took a comfortable cottage for
his father and mother at Killingworth, where he had worked before his
removal to Scotland, and where he now once more obtained employment,
still as a brakesman.  In that cottage this good and brave son
supported his aged parents till their death, in all the simple luxury
that his small means would then permit him.

That, however, was not the end of George's misfortunes.  Shortly after,
he was drawn by lot as a militiaman; and according to the law of that
time (for this was in 1807, during the very height of the wars against
Napoleon) he must either serve in person or else pay heavily to secure
a substitute.  George chose regretfully the latter course--the only one
open to him if he wished still to support his parents and his infant
son.  But in order to do so, he had to pay away the whole remainder of
his carefully hoarded savings, and even to borrow 6 pounds to make up
the payment for the substitute.  It must have seemed very hard to him
to do this, and many men would have sunk under the blow, become
hopeless, or taken to careless rowdy drinking habits.  George
Stephenson felt it bitterly, and gave way for a while to a natural
despondency; he would hardly have been human if he had not; but still,
he lived over it, and in the end worked on again with fuller resolution
and vigour than ever.

For several years Geordie, as his fellow-colliers affectionately called
him, continued to live on at one or other of the Killingworth
collieries.  In a short time, he entered into a small contract with his
employers for "brakeing" the engines; and in the course of this
contract, he invented certain improvements in the matter of saving wear
and tear of ropes, which were both profitable to himself and also in
some small degree pointed the way toward his future plans for the
construction of railways.  It is true, the two subjects have not,
apparently, much in common; but they are connected in this way, that
both proceed upon the principle of reducing the friction to the
smallest possible quantity.  It was this principle that Stephenson was
gradually learning to appreciate more and more at its proper value; and
it was this which finally led him to the very summit of a great and
pre-eminently useful profession.  The great advantage, indeed, of a
level railway over an up-and-down ordinary road is simply that in the
railway the resistance and friction are almost entirely got rid of.

It was in 1810, when Stephenson was twenty-nine, that his first
experiment in serious engineering was made.  A coal-pit had been sunk
at Killingworth, and a rude steam-engine of that time had been set to
pump the water out of its shaft; but, somehow, the engine made no
headway against the rising springs at the bottom of the mine.  For
nearly a year the engine worked away in vain, till at last, one
Saturday afternoon, Geordie Stephenson went over to examine her.
"Well, George," said a pitman, standing by, "what do you think of her?"
"Man," said George, boldly, "I could alter her and make her draw.  In a
week I could let you all go the bottom." The pitman reported this
confident speech of the young brakesman to the manager; and the
manager, at his wits' end for a remedy, determined to let this fellow
Stephenson try his hand at her. After all, if he did no good, he would
be much like all the others; and anyhow he seemed to have confidence in
himself, which, if well grounded, is always a good thing.

George's confidence WAS well grounded.  It was not the confidence of
ignorance, but that of knowledge.  He UNDERSTOOD the engine now, and he
saw at once the root of the evil.  He picked the engine to pieces,
altered it to suit the requirements of the case, and set it to work to
pump without delay.  Sure enough, he kept his word; and within the
week, the mine was dry, and the men were sent to the bottom.  This was
a grand job for George's future.  The manager, a Mr. Dodds, not only
gave him ten pounds at once as a present, in acknowledgment of his
practical skill, but also appointed him engine-man of the new pit,
another rise in the social scale as well as in the matter of wages.
Dodds kept him in mind for the future, too; and a couple of years
later, on a vacancy occurring, he promoted the promising hand to be
engine-wright of all the collieries under his management, at a salary
of 100 pounds a year. When a man's income comes to be reckoned by the
year, rather than by the week or month, it is a sign that he is growing
into a person of importance.  George had now a horse to ride upon, on
his visits of inspection to the various engines; and his work was
rather one of mechanical engineering than of mere ordinary labouring
handicraft.

The next few years of George Stephenson's life were mainly taken up in
providing for the education of his boy Robert.  He had been a good son,
and he was now a good father.  Feeling acutely how much he himself had
suffered, and how many years he had been put back, by his own want of a
good sound rudimentary education, he determined that Robert should not
suffer from a similar cause. Indeed, George Stephenson's splendid
abilities were kept in the background far too long, owing to his early
want of regular instruction.  So the good father worked hard to send
his boy to school; not to the village teacher's only, but to a school
for gentlemen's sons at Newcastle.  By mending clocks and watches in
spare moments, and by rigid economy in all unnecessary expenses
(especially beer), Stephenson had again gathered together a little
hoard, which mounted up this time to a hundred guineas.  A hundred
guineas is a fortune and a capital to a working man.  He was therefore
rich enough, not only to send little Robert to school, but even to buy
him a donkey, on which the boy made the journey every day from
Killingworth to Newcastle.  This was in 1815, when George was
thirty-four, and Robert twelve.  Perhaps no man who ever climbed so
high as George Stephenson, had ever reached so little of the way at so
comparatively late an age.  For in spite of his undoubted success,
viewed from the point of view of his origin and early prospects, he was
as yet after all nothing more than the common engine-wright of the
Killingworth collieries--a long way off as yet from the distinguished
father of the railway system.

George Stephenson's connection with the locomotive, however, was even
now beginning.  Already, in 1816, he and his boy had tried a somewhat
higher flight of mechanical and scientific skill than usual, in the
construction of a sun-dial, which involves a considerable amount of
careful mathematical work; and now George found that the subject of
locomotive engines was being forced by circumstances upon his
attention.  From the moment he was appointed engine-wright of the
Killingworth collieries, he began to think about all possible means of
hauling coal at cheaper rates from the pit's mouth to the shipping
place on the river.  For that humble object alone--an object that lay
wholly within the line of his own special business--did the great
railway projector set out upon his investigations into the
possibilities of the locomotive.  Indeed, in its earliest origin, the
locomotive was almost entirely connected with coals and mining; its
application to passenger traffic on the large scale was quite a later
and secondary consideration.  It was only by accident, so to speak,
that the true capabilities of railways were finally discovered in the
actual course of their practical employment.

George Stephenson was not the first person to construct either a
locomotive or a tramway.  Both were already in use, in more or less
rude forms, at several collieries.  But he WAS the first person to
bring the two to such a pitch of perfection, that what had been at
first a mere clumsy mining contrivance, became developed into a smooth
and easy iron highway for the rapid and convenient conveyance of goods
and passengers over immense distances.  Of course, this great
invention, like all other great inventions, was not the work of one day
or one man.  Many previous heads had helped to prepare the way for
George Stephenson; and George Stephenson himself had been working at
the subject for many years before he even reached the first stage of
realized endeavour.  As early as 1814 he constructed his first
locomotive at Killingworth colliery; it was not until 1822 that he laid
the first rail of his first large line, the Stockton and Darlington
Railway.

Stephenson's earliest important improvement in the locomotive consisted
in his invention of what is called the steam-blast, by which the steam
is made to increase the draught of the fire, and so largely add to the
effectiveness of the engine.  It was this invention that enabled him at
last to make the railway into the great carrier of the world, and to
begin the greatest social and commercial upheaval that has ever
occurred in the whole history of the human race.

Meanwhile, however, George was not entirely occupied with the
consideration of his growing engine.  He had the clocks and watches to
mend; he had Robert's schooling to look after; and he had another
practical matter even nearer home than the locomotive on which to
exercise his inventive genius.  One day, in 1814, the main gallery of
the colliery caught fire.  Stephenson at once descended into the
burning pit, with a chosen band of volunteers, who displayed the usual
heroic courage of colliers in going to the rescue of their comrades;
and, at the risk of their lives, these brave men bricked up the burning
portion, and so, by excluding the air, put out the dangerous fire.
Still, even so, several of the workmen had been suffocated, and one of
the pitmen asked Geordie in dismay whether nothing could be done to
prevent such terrible disasters in future.  "The price of coal-mining
now," he said, "is pitmen's lives."  Stephenson promised to think the
matter over; and he did think it over with good effect.  The result of
his thought was the apparatus still affectionately known to the pitmen
as "the Geordie lamp."  It is a lamp so constructed that the flame
cannot pass out into the air outside, and so cause explosions in the
dangerous fire-damp which is always liable to occur abundantly in the
galleries of coal mines.  By this invention alone George Stephenson's
name and memory might have been kept green for ever; for his lamp has
been the means of saving thousands of lives from a sudden, a terrible,
and a pitiful death.  Most accidents that now occur in mines are due to
the neglect of ordinary precautions, and to the perverse habit of
carrying a naked lighted candle in the hand (contrary to regulations)
instead of a carefully guarded safety lamp.  Yet so culpably reckless
of their own and other men's lives are a large number of people
everywhere, that in spite of the most stringent and salutary rules,
explosions from this cause (and, therefore, easily avoidable) take
place constantly to the present day, though far less frequently than
before the invention of the Geordie lamp.

Curiously enough, at the very time when George Stephenson was busy
inventing his lamp at Killingworth, Sir Humphrey Davy was working at
just the same matter in London; and the two lamps, though a little
different in minor points of construction, are practically the same in
general principle.  Now, Sir Humphrey was then the great fashionable
natural philosopher of the day, the favourite of London society, and
the popular lecturer of the Royal Institution. His friends thought it a
monstrous idea that his splendid life-saving apparatus should have been
independently devised by "an engine-wright of Killingworth of the name
of Stephenson--a person not even possessing a knowledge of the elements
of chemistry." This sounds very odd reading at the present day, when
the engine-wright of the name of Stephenson has altered the whole face
of the world, while Davy is chiefly remembered as a meritorious and
able chemist; but at the time, Stephenson's claim to the invention met
with little courtesy from the great public of London, where a meeting
was held on purpose to denounce his right to the credit of the
invention.  What the coal-owners and colliers of the North Country
thought about the matter was sufficiently shown by their subscription
of 1000 pounds, as a Stephenson testimonial fund. With part of the
money, a silver tankard was presented to the deserving engine-wright,
while the remainder of the sum was handed over to him in ready cash.  A
very acceptable present it was, and one which George Stephenson
remembered with pride down to his dying day.  The Geordie lamp
continues in use to the present moment in the Tyneside collieries with
excellent effect.

For some years more, Mr. Stephenson (he is now fairly entitled to that
respectable prefix) went on still further experimenting on the question
of locomotives and railways.  He was now beginning to learn that much
unnecessary wear and tear arose on the short lines of rail down from
the pit's mouths to the loading-places on the river by the inequalities
and roughnesses of the joints; and he invented a method of overlapping
the rails which quite got over this source of loss--loss of speed, loss
of power, and loss of material at once.  It was in 1819 that he laid
down his first considerable piece of road, the Hetton railway.  The
owners of a colliery at the village of Hetton, in Durham, determined to
replace their waggon road by a locomotive line; and they invited the
now locally famous Killingworth engine-wright to act as their engineer.
Stephenson gladly undertook the post; and he laid down a railway of
eight miles in length, on the larger part of which the trucks were to
be drawn by "the iron horse," as people now began to style the altered
and improved locomotive.  The Hetton railway was opened in 1822, and
the assembled crowd were delighted at beholding a single engine draw
seventeen loaded trucks after it, at the extraordinary rate of four
miles an hour--nearly as fast as a man could walk. Whence it may be
gathered that Stephenson's ideas upon the question of speed were still
on a very humble scale indeed.

Before the Hetton railway was opened, however, George Stephenson had
shown one more proof of his excellence as a father by sending his boy
Robert, now nineteen, to Edinburgh University.  It was a serious
expense for a man who was even now, after all, hardly more than a
working man of the superior grade; but George Stephenson was well
repaid for the sacrifice he thus made on behalf of his only son.  He
lived to see him the greatest practical engineer of his own time, and
to feel that his success was in large measure due to the wider and more
accurate scientific training the lad had received from his Edinburgh
teachers.

In 1819 George married again, his second wife being the daughter of a
farmer at Black Callerton.

The work which finally secured the position of George Stephenson and of
his dearly loved locomotive was the Stockton and Darlington railway.
Like all the other early railways, it was originally projected simply
as a mineral line.  Darlington lies in the centre of a rich inland
mining district; but the impossibility of getting the coal carried to
the sea by cart or donkey, long prevented the opening up of its immense
natural wealth.  At last, as early as 1817, Edward Pease and a few
other enterprising Darlington Quakers determined to build a line of
railway from the mining region to Stockton, on the river Tees, where
the coal could be loaded into sea-going ships.  It was a very long
line, compared to any railway that had yet been constructed; but it was
still only to be worked by horse-power--to be, in fact, what we now
call a tramway, rather than a railway in the modern sense.  However,
while the plan was still undecided, George Stephenson, who had heard
about the proposed scheme, went over to Darlington one day, and boldly
asked to see Mr. Pease.  The good Quaker received him kindly, and
listened to his arguments in favour of the locomotive.  "Come over to
Killingworth some day and see my engine at work," said Stephenson,
confidently; "and if you do you will never think of horses again."  Mr.
Pease, with Quaker caution, came and looked. George put the engine
through its paces, and showed off its marvellous capabilities to such
good effect that Edward Pease was immediately converted.  Henceforth,
he became a decided advocate of locomotives, and greatly aided by his
wealth and influence in securing their final triumph.

Not only that, but Mr. Pease also aided Stephenson in carrying out a
design which George had long had upon his mind--the establishment of a
regular locomotive factory, where the work of engine-making for this
particular purpose might be carried on with all the necessary finish
and accuracy.  George himself put into the concern his precious 1000
pounds, not one penny of which he had yet touched; while Pease and a
friend advanced as much between them.  A factory was forthwith started
at Newcastle on a small scale, and the hardworking engine-wright found
himself now fully advanced to the commercial dignity of Stephenson and
Co.  With the gradual growth of railways, that humble Newcastle factory
grew gradually into one of the largest and wealthiest manufacturing
establishments in all England.

Meanwhile, Stephenson was eagerly pushing on the survey of the Stockton
and Darlington railway, all the more gladly now that he knew it was to
be worked by means of his own adopted child, the beloved locomotive.
He worked at his line early and late; he took the sights with the
spirit-level with his own eye; he was determined to make it a model
railway.  It was a long and heavy work, for railway surveying was then
a new art, and the appliances were all fresh and experimental; but in
the end, Stephenson brought it to a happy conclusion, and struck at
once the death-blow of the old road-travelling system.  The line was
opened successfully in 1825, and the engine started off on the
inaugural ceremony with a magnificent train of thirty-eight vehicles.
"Such was its velocity," says a newspaper of the day, "that in some
parts the speed was frequently twelve miles an hour."

The success of the Stockton and Darlington railway was so immense and
unexpected, the number of passengers who went by it was so great, and
the quantity of coal carried for shipment so far beyond anything the
projectors themselves could have anticipated, that a desire soon began
to be felt for similar works in other places. There are no two towns in
England which absolutely need a railway communication from one to the
other so much as Liverpool and Manchester.  The first is the great port
of entry for cotton, the second is the great centre of its manufacture.
The Bridgewater canal had helped for a time to make up for the want of
water communication between those two closely connected towns; but as
trade developed, the canal became too small for the demands upon it,
and the need for an additional means of intercourse was deeply felt.  A
committee was formed to build a railway in this busy district, and
after a short time George Stephenson was engaged to superintend its
construction.

A long and severe fight was fought over the Liverpool and Manchester
railway, and it was at first doubtful whether the scheme would ever be
carried out.  Many great landowners were strongly opposed to it, and
tried their best to keep the bill for authorizing it from passing
through Parliament.  Stephenson himself was compelled to appear in
London as a witness before a parliamentary committee, and was closely
cross-examined as to the possibilities of his plan.  In those days,
even after the success of the Stockton and Darlington line, his views
about the future of railways were still regarded by most sober persons
as ridiculously wild and enthusiastic; while the notion that trains
might be made to travel twice as fast as stage-coaches, was scouted as
the most palpable and ridiculous delusion.  One of the members of the
committee pressed Stephenson very hard with questions.  "Suppose," he
said, "a cow were to get upon the line, and the engine were to come
into collision with it; wouldn't that be very awkward, now?"  George
looked up at him with a merry twinkle of the eye, and answered in his
broad North Country dialect, "Oo, ay, very awkward for the COO."

In spite of all Stephenson's earnestness and mother wit, however,
Parliament refused to pass the bill (in 1825), and for the moment the
engineer's vexation was bitter to behold.  He and his friends plucked
up heart, however; they were fighting the winning battle against
prejudice and obstruction, and they were sure to conquer in the long
run.  The line was resurveyed by other engineers; the lands of the
hostile owners were avoided; the causes of offence were dexterously
smoothed down; and after another hard fight, in 1826, the bill
authorizing the construction of the Liverpool and Manchester railway
was finally passed.  The board at once appointed Stephenson engineer
for constructing the line, at a salary of 1000 pounds a year.  George
might now fairly consider himself entitled to the honours of an Esquire.

The line was a difficult one to construct; but George Stephenson set
about it with the skill and knowledge acquired during many years of
slow experience; and he performed it with distinguished success.  He
was now forty-four; and he had had more to do with the laying down of
rails than any other man then living.  The great difficulty of the
Liverpool and Manchester line lay in the fact that it had to traverse a
vast shaking bog or morass, Chat Moss, which the best engineers had
emphatically declared it would be impossible to cross.  George
Stephenson, however, had a plan for making the impossible possible.  He
simply floated his line on a broad bottom, like a ship, on the top of
the quaking quagmire; and proceeded to lay down his rails on this
seemingly fragile support without further scruple.  It answered
admirably, and still answers to the present day.  The other works on
the railway, especially the cuttings, were such as might well have
appalled the boldest heart in those experimental ages of railway
enterprise.  It is easy enough for us now to undertake tunnelling great
hills or filling up wide valleys with long ranges of viaduct, because
the thing has been done so often, and the prospect of earning a fair
return on the money sunk can be calculated with so high a degree of
reasonable probability.  But it required no little faith for George
Stephenson and his backers to drive a level road, for the first time,
through solid rocks and over trembling morasses, the whole way from
Liverpool to Manchester.  He persevered, however, and in 1830, after
four years' toilsome and ceaseless labour, during which he had worked
far-harder than the sturdiest navvy on the line, his railway was
finally opened for regular traffic.

Before the completion of the railway, George Stephenson had taken part
in a great contest for the best locomotive at Liverpool, a prize of 500
pounds having been offered by the company to the successful competitor.
Stephenson sent in his improved model, the Rocket, constructed after
plans of his own and his son Robert's, and it gained the prize against
all its rivals, travelling at what was then considered the incredible
rate of 35 miles an hour.  It was thus satisfactorily settled that the
locomotive was the best power for drawing carriages on railways, and
George Stephenson's long battle was thus at last practically won.

The opening of the Liverpool and Manchester railway was an era in the
history of the world.  From the moment that great undertaking was
complete, there could no longer be any doubt about the utility and
desirability of railways, and all opposition died away almost at once.
New lines began immediately to be laid out, and in an incredibly short
time the face of England was scarred by the main trunks in that network
of iron roads with which its whole surface is now so closely covered.
The enormous development of the railway system benefited the Stephenson
family in more than one way. Robert Stephenson became the engineer of
the vast series of lines now known as the London and North Western; and
the increased demand for locomotives caused George Stephenson's small
factory at Newcastle to blossom out suddenly into an immense and
flourishing manufacturing concern.

The rest of George Stephenson's life is one long story of unbroken
success.  In 1831, the year after the opening of the Liverpool and
Manchester line, George, being now fifty, began to think of settling
down in a more permanent home.  His son Robert, who was surveying the
Leicester and Swannington railway, observed on an estate called
Snibston, near Ashby-de-la-Zouch, what to his experienced geological
eye looked like the probable indications of coal beneath the surface.
He wrote to his father about it, and as the estate was at the time for
sale, George, now a comparatively wealthy man, bought it up on his
son's recommendation.  He also pitched his home close by at Alton
Grange, and began to sink shafts in search of coal.  He found it in due
time; and thus, in addition to his Newcastle works, he became a
flourishing colliery proprietor.  It is pleasing to note that
Stephenson, unlike too many other self-made men, always treated his
workmen with the greatest kindness and consideration, erecting
admirable cottages for their accommodation, and providing them with
church, chapel, and schools for their religious and social education.

While living at Alton Grange, Stephenson was engaged in laying out
several new lines in the middle and north of England, especially the
Grand Junction and the Midland, both of which he constructed with great
boldness and practical skill.  As he grew older and more famous, he
began to mix in the truly best society of England; his acquaintance
being sought by all the most eminent men in literature, science, and
political life.  Though but an uneducated working man by origin, George
Stephenson had so improved his mind by constant thought and expansive
self-education, that he was able to meet these able and distinguished
friends of his later days on terms of perfect intellectual and social
equality.  To the last, however, he never forgot his older and poorer
friends, nor was he ever ashamed of their acquaintance.  A pleasant
trait is narrated by his genial biographer, Dr. Smiles, who notices
that on one occasion he stopped to speak to one of his wealthy
acquaintances in a fine carriage, and then turned to shake hands with
the coachman on the box, whom he had known and respected in his earlier
days. He enjoyed, too, the rare pleasure of feeling his greatness
recognized in his own time: and once, when he went over to Brussels on
a visit to the king of the Belgians, he was pleased and surprised, as
the royal party entered the ball-room at the Town Hall, to hear a
general murmur among the guests of "Which is Stephenson?"

George Stephenson continued to live for sixteen years, first at Alton
Grange, and afterwards at Tapton House, near Chesterfield, in comfort
and opulence; growing big pines and melons, keeping birds and dogs, and
indulging himself towards the end in the well-earned repose to which
his useful and laborious life fully entitled him. At last, on the 12th
of August, 1848, he died suddenly of intermittent fever, in his
sixty-seventh year, and was peacefully buried in Chesterfield church.
Probably no one man who ever lived did so much to change and renovate
the whole aspect of human life as George Stephenson; and, unlike many
other authors of great revolutions, he lived long enough to see the
full result of his splendid labours in the girdling of England by his
iron roads.  A grand and simple man, he worked honestly and steadfastly
throughout his days, and he found his reward in the unprecedented
benefits which his locomotive was even then conferring upon his
fellow-men. It is indeed wonderful to think how very different is the
England in which we live to-day, from that in which we might possibly
have been living were it not for the barefooted little collier boy who
made clay models of engines at Wylam, and who grew at last into the
great and famous engineer of the marvellous Liverpool and Manchester
railway.  The main characteristic of George Stephenson was
perseverance; and it was that perseverance that enabled him at last to
carry out his magnificent schemes in the face of so much bitter and
violent opposition.




III.

JOHN GIBSON, SCULPTOR.


In most cases, the working man who raises himself to wealth and
position, does so by means of trade, which is usually the natural
outgrowth of his own special handicraft or calling.  If he attains, not
only to riches, but to distinction as well, it is in general by
mechanical talent, the direction of the mind being naturally biased by
the course of one's own ordinary occupations.  England has been
exceptionally rich in great engineers and inventive geniuses of such
humble origin--working men who have introduced great improvements in
manufactures or communications; and our modern English civilization has
been immensely influenced by the lives of these able and successful
mechanical toilers.  From Brindley, the constructor of the earliest
great canal, to Joseph Gillott, the inventor of the very steel pen with
which this book is written; from Arkwright the barber who fashioned the
first spinning-machine, to Crompton the weaver, whose mule gave rise to
the mighty Manchester cotton trade; from Newcomen, who made the first
rough attempt at a steam-engine, to Stephenson, who sent the iron horse
from end to end of the land,--the chief mechanical improvements in the
country have almost all been due to the energy, intelligence, and skill
of our labouring population.  The English mind is intensely practical,
and the English working man, for the last two centuries at least, has
been mainly distinguished for his great mechanical aptitude, bursting
out, here and there, in exceptional persons, under the form of
exceedingly high inventive genius.

At our very doors, however, there is a small nation of largely
different blood and of wholly different speech from our own; a nation
forming a part of our own kingdom, even more closely than the Scotch or
the Irish, and yet in some respects further from us in mind and habit
of life than either; a nation marked rather by the poetical and
artistic, than by the mechanical and practical temperament--the ancient
and noble Welsh people.  It would hardly be reasonable to expect from
the Welsh exactly the same kind of success in life which we often find
in English workmen; the aims and ideals of the two races are so
distinct, and it must be frankly confessed the advantage is not always
on the side of the Englishman. The Welsh peasants, living among their
own romantic hills and valleys, speaking their own soft and exquisite
language, treasuring their own plaintive and melodious poetry, have
grown up with an intense love for beauty and the beautiful closely
intwined into the very warp and woof of their inmost natures.  They
have almost always a natural refinement of manner and delicacy of
speech which is unfortunately too often wanting amongst our rougher
English labouring classes, especially in large towns.  They are
intensely musical, producing a very large proportion of the best
English singers and composers.  They are fond of literature, for which
they have generally some natural capacity, and in which they exercise
themselves to an extent unknown, probably, among people of their class
in any other country.  At the local meetings of bards (as they call
themselves) in Wales, it is not at all uncommon to hear that the first
prize for Welsh poetry has been carried off by a shepherd, and the
first prize for Welsh prose composition by a domestic servant.  In
short, the susceptibilities of the race run rather toward art and
imagination, than toward mere moneymaking and practical ingenuity.

John Gibson, sculptor, of Rome, as he loved to call himself, was a
remarkable embodiment, in many ways, of this self-respecting, artistic,
ideal Welsh peasant temperament.  In a little village near Conway, in
North Wales, there lived at the end of the last century a petty
labouring market gardener of the name of Gibson, who knew and spoke no
other tongue than his native Welsh.  In 1790, his wife gave birth to a
son whom they christened John, and who grew up, a workman's child,
under the shadow of the great castle, and among the exquisite scenery
of the placid land-locked Conway river.  John Gibson's parents, like
the mass of labouring Welsh people, were honest, God-fearing folk, with
a great earnestness of principle, a profound love of truth, and a
hatred of all mean or dirty actions.  They brought up the boy in these
respects in the way he should go; and when he was old he indeed did not
depart from them.  Throughout his life, John Gibson was remarkable for
his calm, earnest, straightforward simplicity, a simplicity which
seemed almost childish to those who could not understand so grand and
uncommon and noble a nature as his.

From his babyhood, almost, the love of art was innate in the boy; and
when he was only seven years old, he began to draw upon a slate a scene
that particularly pleased him--a line of geese sailing upon the smooth
glassy surface of a neighbouring pond.  He drew them as an ordinary
child almost always does draw--one goose after another, in profile, as
though they were in procession, without any attempt at grouping or
perspective in any way.  His mother praised the first attempt, saying
to him in Welsh, "Indeed, Jack, this is very like the geese;" and Jack,
encouraged by her praise, decided immediately to try again.  But not
being an ordinary child, he determined this time to do better; he drew
the geese one behind the other as one generally sees them in actual
nature.  His mother then asked him to draw a horse; and "after gazing
long and often upon one," he says, "I at last ventured to commit him to
the slate." When he had done so, the good mother was even more
delighted.  So, to try his childish art, she asked him to put a rider
on the horse's back.  Jack went out once more, "carefully watched men
on horseback," and then returning, made his sketch accordingly.  In
this childish reminiscence one can see already the first workings of
that spirit which made Gibson afterwards into the greatest sculptor of
all Europe.  He didn't try even then to draw horse or man by mere
guesswork; he went out and studied the subject at first hand.  There
are in that single trait two great elements of success in no matter
what line of life--supreme carefulness, and perfect honesty of
workmanship.

When Jack was nine years old, his father determined to emigrate to
America, and for that purpose went to Liverpool to embark for the
United States.  But when he had got as far as the docks, Mrs. Gibson,
good soul, frightened at the bigness of the ships (a queer cause of
alarm), refused plumply ever to put her foot on one of them.  So her
husband, a dutiful man with a full sense of his wife's government upon
him, consented unwillingly to stop in Liverpool, where he settled down
to work again as a gardener. Hitherto, Jack and his brothers had spoken
nothing but Welsh; but at Liverpool he was put to school, and soon
learned to express himself correctly and easily in English.  Liverpool
was a very different place for young Jack Gibson from Conway: there
were no hills and valleys there, to be sure, but there were shops--such
shops! all full of the most beautiful and highly coloured prints and
caricatures, after the fashion of the days when George IV. was still
Prince Regent.  All his spare time he now gave up to diligently copying
the drawings which he saw spread out in tempting array before him in
the shop-windows.  Flattening his little nose against the glass panes,
he used to look long and patiently at a single figure, till he had got
every detail of its execution fixed firmly on his mind's eye; and then
he would go home hastily and sketch it out at once while the picture
was still quite fresh in his vivid memory.  Afterwards he would return
to the shop-window, and correct his copy by the original till it was
completely finished.  No doubt the boy did all this purely for his own
amusement; but at the same time he was quite unconsciously teaching
himself to draw under a very careful and accurate master--himself.
Already, however, he found his paintings had patrons, for he sold them
when finished to the other boys; and once he got as much as sixpence
for a coloured picture of Napoleon crossing the Alps--"the largest
sum," he says brightly in his memoirs long after, "I had yet received
for a work of art."

Opportunities always arise for those who know how to use them. Little
Jack Gibson used to buy his paper and colours at a stationer's in
Liverpool, who one day said to him kindly, "My lad, you're a constant
customer here: I suppose you're a painter." "Yes, sir," Jack answered,
with childish self-complacency, "I do paint."  The stationer, who had
himself studied at the Royal Academy, asked him to bring his pictures
on view; and when Jack did so, his new friend, Mr. Tourmeau, was so
much pleased with them that he lent the boy drawings to copy, and
showed him how to draw for himself from plaster casts.  These first
amateur lessons must have given the direction to all Gibson's later
life: for when the time came for him to choose a trade, he was not set
to till the ground like his father, but was employed at once on
comparatively artistic and intelligent handicraft.

Jack was fourteen when his father apprenticed him to a firm of
cabinet-makers.  For the first year, he worked away contentedly at legs
and mouldings; but as soon as he had learnt the rudiments of the trade
he persuaded his masters to change his indentures, and let him take the
more suitable employment of carving woodwork for ornamental furniture.
He must have been a good workman and a promising boy, one may be sure,
or his masters would never have countenanced such a revolutionary
proceeding on the part of a raw apprentice.  Young Gibson was delighted
with his new occupation, and pursued it so eagerly that he carved even
during his leisure hours from plaster casts.  But after another year,
as ill-luck or good fortune would have it, he happened to come across a
London marble-cutter, who had come down to Liverpool to carve flowers
in marble for a local firm.  The boy was enchanted with his freer and
more artistic work; when the marble-cutter took him over a big yard,
and showed him the process of modelling and cutting, he began to feel a
deep contempt for his own stiff and lifeless occupation of woodcarving.
Inspired with the desire to learn this higher craft, he bought some
clay, took it home, and moulded it for himself after all the casts he
could lay his hands on.  Mr. Francis, the proprietor of the marble
works, had a German workman in his employ of the name of Luge, who used
to model small figures, chiefly, no doubt, for monumental purposes.
Young Gibson borrowed a head of Bacchus that Luge had composed, and
made a copy of it himself in clay.  Mr. Francis was well pleased with
this early attempt, and also with a clever head of Mercury in marble,
which Gibson carved in his spare moments.

The more the lad saw of clay and marble, the greater grew his distaste
for mere woodwork.  At last, he determined to ask Mr. Francis to buy
out his indentures from the cabinet-makers, and let him finish his
apprenticeship as a sculptor.  But unfortunately the cabinet-makers
found Gibson too useful a person to be got rid of so easily: they said
he was the most industrious lad they had ever had; and so his very
virtues seemed as it were to turn against him. Not so, really: Mr.
Francis thought so well of the boy that he offered the masters 70
pounds to be quit of their bargain; and in the end, Gibson himself
having made a very firm stand in the matter, he was released from his
indentures and handed over finally to Mr. Francis and a sculptor's life.

And now the eager boy was at last "truly happy."  He had to model all
day long, and he worked away at it with a will.  Shortly after he went
to Mr. Francis's yard, a visitor came upon business, a
magnificent-looking old man, with snowy hair and Roman features. It was
William Roscoe, the great Liverpool banker, himself a poor boy who had
risen, and who had found time not only to build up for himself an
enormous fortune, but also to become thoroughly well acquainted with
literature and art by the way.  Mr. Roscoe had written biographies of
Lorenzo de Medici, the great Florentine, and of Leo X., the art-loving
pope; and throughout his whole life he was always deeply interested in
painting and sculpture and everything that related to them.  He was a
philanthropist, too, who had borne his part bravely in the great
struggle for the abolition of the slave trade; and to befriend a
struggling lad of genius like John Gibson was the very thing that was
nearest and dearest to his benevolent heart.  Mr. Francis showed Roscoe
the boy's drawings and models; and Roscoe's appreciative eye saw in
them at once the visible promise of great things to be.  He had come to
order a chimney-piece for his library at Allerton, where his important
historical works were all composed; and he determined that the clever
boy should have a chief hand in its production.  A few days later he
returned again with a valuable old Italian print.  "I want you to make
a bas-relief in baked clay," he said to Gibson, "from this print for
the centres of my mantelpiece."  Gibson was overjoyed.  The print was
taken from a fresco of Raphael's in the Vatican at Rome, and Gibson's
work was to reproduce it in clay in low relief, as a sculpture picture.
He did so entirely to his new patron's satisfaction, and this his first
serious work is now duly preserved in the Liverpool Institution which
Mr. Roscoe had been mainly instrumental in founding.

Roscoe had a splendid collection of prints and drawings at Allerton;
and he invited the clever Welsh lad over there frequently, and allowed
him to study them all to his heart's content.  To a lad like John
Gibson, such an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the works of
Raphael and Michael Angelo was a great and pure delight. Before he was
nineteen, he began to think of a big picture which he hoped to paint
some day; and he carried it out as well as he was able in his own
self-taught fashion.  For as yet, it must be remembered, Gibson had had
no regular artistic instruction: there was none such, indeed, to be had
at all in Liverpool in his day; and there was no real art going on in
the town in any way.  Mr. Francis, his master, was no artist; nor was
there anybody at the works who could teach him: for as soon as Mr.
Francis found out the full measure of Gibson's abilities, he dismissed
his German artist Luge, and put the clever boy entirely in his place.
At this time, Gibson was only receiving six shillings a week as wages;
but Mr. Francis got good prices for many of his works, and was not
ashamed even to put his own name upon the promising lad's artistic
performances.

Mr. Roscoe did not merely encourage the young sculptor; he set him also
on the right road for ultimate success.  He urged Gibson to study
anatomy, without which no sculpture worthy of the name is possible.
Gibson gladly complied, for he knew that Michael Angelo had been a
great anatomist, and Michael was just at that moment the budding
sculptor's idol and ideal.  But how could he learn?  A certain Dr. Vose
was then giving lectures on anatomy to young surgeons at Liverpool, and
on Roscoe's recommendation he kindly admitted the eager student gratis
to his dissecting-room.  Gibson dissected there with a will in all his
spare moments, and as he put his mind into the work he soon became well
versed in the construction of the human body.

From the day that Gibson arrived at man's estate, the great dream of
his life was to go to Rome.  For Rome is to art what London is to
industry--the metropolis in its own way of the entire earth. But
travelling in 1810 cost a vast deal of money; and the poor Liverpool
marble-cutter (for as yet he was really nothing more) could hardly hope
to earn the immense sum that such an expedition would necessarily cost
him.  So for six years more he went on working at Liverpool in his own
native untaught fashion, doing his best to perfect himself, but feeling
sadly the lack of training and competition.  One of the last works he
executed while still in Mr. Francis's service was a chimney-piece for
Sir John Gladstone, father of the future premier.  Sir John was so
pleased with the execution, that he gave the young workman ten pounds
as a present. But in spite of occasional encouragement like this,
Gibson felt himself at Liverpool, as he says, "chained down by the leg,
and panting for liberation."

In 1817, when he was just twenty-seven, he determined to set off to
London.  He took with him good introductions from Mr. Roscoe to Mr.
Brougham (afterwards Lord Chancellor), to Christie, the big
picture-dealer, and to several other influential people.  Later on,
Roscoe recommended him to still more important leaders in the world of
art--Flaxman the great sculptor, Benjamin West, the Quaker painter and
President of the Royal Academy, and others of like magnitude.  Mr.
Watson Taylor, a wealthy art patron, gave Gibson employment, and was
anxious that he should stop in London.  But Gibson wanted more than
employment; he wanted to LEARN, to perfect himself, to become great in
his art.  He could do that nowhere but at Rome, and to Rome therefore
he was determined to go.  Mr. Taylor still begged him to wait a little.
"Go to Rome I will," Gibson answered boldly, "even if I have to go
there on foot."

He was not quite reduced to this heroic measure, however, for his
Liverpool friends made up a purse of 150 pounds for him (we may be sure
it was repaid later on); and with that comparatively large sum in his
pocket the young stone-cutter started off gaily on his continental
tour, from which he was not to return for twenty-seven years.  He drove
from Paris to Rome, sharing a carriage with a Scotch gentleman; and
when he arrived in the Pope's city (as it then was) he knew absolutely
not a single word of Italian, or of any other language on earth save
Welsh and English.  In those days, Canova, the great Venetian sculptor,
was the head of artistic society in Rome; and as ALL society in Rome is
more or less artistic, he might almost be said to have led the whole
life of the great and lively city.  Indeed, the position of such a man
in Italy resembles far more that of a duke in England than of an artist
as we here are accustomed to think of him.  Gibson had letters of
introduction to this prince of sculptors from his London friends; and
when he went to present them, he found Canova in his studio, surrounded
by his numerous scholars and admirers.  The Liverpool stone-cutter had
brought a few of his drawings with him, and Canova examined them with
great attention.  Instinctively he recognized the touch of genius.
When he had looked at them keenly for a few minutes, he turned kindly
to the trembling young man, and said at once, "Come to me alone next
week, for I want to have a talk with you."

On the appointed day, Gibson, quivering with excitement; presented
himself once more at the great master's studio.  Canova was surrounded
as before by artists and visitors; but in a short time he took Gibson
into a room by himself, and began to speak with him in his very broken
English.  Many artists came to Rome, he said, with very small means,
and that perhaps might be Gibson's case. "Let me have the
gratification, then," he went on, "of assisting you to prosecute your
studies.  I am rich.  I am anxious to be of use to you.  Let me forward
you in your art as long as you stay in Rome."

Gibson replied, with many stammerings, that he hoped his slender means
would suffice for his personal needs, but that if Canova would only
condescend to give him instruction, to make him his pupil, to let him
model in his studio, he would be eternally grateful.  Canova was one of
the most noble and lovable of men.  He acceded at once to Gibson's
request, and Gibson never forgot his kind and fatherly assistance.
"Dear generous master," the Welsh sculptor wrote many years after, when
Canova had long passed away, "I see you before me now.  I hear your
soft Venetian dialect, and your kindly words inspiring my efforts and
gently correcting my defects.  My heart still swells with grateful
recollection of you."

Canova told his new pupil to devote a few days first to seeing the
sights of Rome; but Gibson was impatient to begin at once.  "I shall be
at your studio to-morrow morning," the ardent Welshman said; and he
kept his word.  Canova, pleased with so much earnestness and
promptitude, set him to work forthwith upon a clay model from his own
statue of the Pugilist.  Gibson went to the task with a will, moulding
the clay as best he could into shape; but he still knew so little of
the technical ways of regular sculptors that he tried to model this
work from the clay alone, though its pose was such that it could not
possibly hold together without an iron framework.  Canova saw his error
and smiled, but let him go on so that he might learn his business by
experience.  In a day or two the whole thing, of course, collapsed by
its own weight; and then Canova called in a blacksmith and showed the
eager beginner how the mechanical skeleton was formed with iron bars,
and interlacing crosses of wood and wire.  This was quite a new idea to
Gibson, who had modelled hitherto only in his own self-taught fashion
with moist clay, letting it support its own weight as best it might.
Another pupil then fleshed out the iron skeleton with clay, and roughly
shaped it to the required figure, so that it stood as firm as a rock
for Gibson to work upon.  The new hand turned to vigorously once more;
and, in spite of his seeming rawness, finished the copy so well that
Canova admitted him at once to the Academy to model from life.  At this
Academy Canova himself, who loved art far more than money, used to
attend twice a week to give instruction to students without receiving
any remuneration whatsoever.  It is of such noble men as this that the
world of art is largely made up--that world which we too-practical
English have always undervalued or even despised.

Gibson's student period at Rome under Canova was a very happy episode
in a uniformly happy and beautiful life.  His only trouble was that he
had not been able to come there earlier.  Singularly free from every
taint of envy (like all the great sculptors of his time), he could not
help regretting when he saw other men turning out work of such great
excellence while he was still only a learner.  "When I observed the
power and experience of youths much younger than myself," he says in
his generous appreciative fashion, "their masterly manner of sketching
in the figure, and their excellent imitation of nature, my spirits fell
many degrees, and I felt humbled and unhappy."  He need not have done
so, for the man who thus distrusts his own work is always the truest
workman; it is only fools or poor creatures who are pleased and
self-satisfied with their own first bungling efforts.  But the great
enjoyment of Rome to Gibson consisted in the free artistic society
which he found there.  At Liverpool, he had felt almost isolated; there
was hardly anybody with whom he could talk on an equality about his
artistic interests; nobody but himself cared about the things that
pleased and engrossed his earnest soul the most.  But at Rome, there
was a great society of artists; every man's studio was open to his
friends and fellow-workers; and a lively running fire of criticism went
on everywhere about all new works completed or in progress.  He was
fortunate, too, in the exact moment of his residence: Rome then
contained at once, besides himself, the two truest sculptors of the
present century, Canova the Venetian, and Thorwaldsen the Dane.  Both
these great masters were singularly free from jealousy, rivalry, or
vanity.  In their perfect disinterestedness and simplicity of character
they closely resembled Gibson himself.  The ardent and pure-minded
young Welshman, who kept himself so unspotted from the world in his
utter devotion to his chosen art, could not fail to derive an elevated
happiness from his daily intercourse with these two noble and
sympathetic souls.

After Gibson had been for some time in Canova's studio, his illustrious
master told him that the sooner he took to modelling a life-size figure
of his own invention, the better.  So Gibson hired a studio (with what
means he does not tell us in his short sketch of his own life) close to
Canova's, so that the great Venetian was able to drop in from time to
time and assist him with his criticism and judgment.  How delightful is
the friendly communion of work implied in all this graceful artistic
Roman life!  How different from the keen competition and jealous
rivalry which too often distinguishes our busy money-getting English
existence!  In 1819, two years after Gibson's arrival at Rome, he began
to model his Mars and Cupid, a more than life-size group, on which he
worked patiently and lovingly for many months.  When it was nearly
finished, one day a knock came at the studio door.  After the knock, a
handsome young man entered, and announced himself brusquely as the Duke
of Devonshire.  "Canova sent me," he said, "to see what you were
doing."  Gibson wasn't much accustomed to dukes in those days--he grew
more familiar with them later on--and we may be sure the poor young
artist's heart beat a little more fiercely than usual when the stranger
asked him the price of his Mars and Cupid in marble.  The sculptor had
never yet sold a statue, and didn't know how much he ought to ask; but
after a few minutes' consideration he said, "Five hundred pounds.  But,
perhaps," he added timidly, "I have said too much."  "Oh no," the duke
answered, "not at all too much;" and he forthwith ordered (or, as
sculptors prefer to say, commissioned) the statue to be executed for
him in marble.  Gibson was delighted, and ran over at once to tell
Canova, thinking he had done a splendid stroke of business. Canova
shared his pleasure, till the young man came to the price; then the
older sculptor's face fell ominously.  "Five hundred pounds!" he cried
in dismay; "why, it won't cover the cost of marble and workmanship."
And so indeed it turned out; for when the work was finished, it had
stood Gibson in 520 pounds for marble and expenses, and left him twenty
pounds out of pocket in the end.  So he got less than nothing after all
for his many months of thought and labour over clay and marble alike.

Discouraging as this beginning must have proved, it was nevertheless in
reality the first important step in a splendid and successful career.
It is something to have sold your first statue, even if you sell it at
a disadvantage.  In 1821 Gibson modelled a group of Pysche and the
Zephyrs.  That winter Sir George Beaumont, himself a distinguished
amateur artist, and a great patron of art, came to Rome; and Canova
sent him to see the young Welshman's new composition.  Sir George asked
the price, and Gibson, this time more cautious, asked for time to
prepare an estimate, and finally named 700 pounds.  To his joy, Sir
George immediately ordered it, and also introduced many wealthy
connoisseurs to the rising sculptor's studio.  That same winter, also,
the Duke of Devonshire came again, and commissioned a bas-relief in
marble (which is now at Chatsworth House, with many other of Gibson's
works), at a paying price, too, which was a great point for the young
man's scanty exchequer.

Unfortunately, Gibson has not left us any notice of how he managed to
make both ends meet during this long adult student period at Rome.
Information on that point would indeed be very interesting; but so
absorbed was the eager Welshman always in his art, that he seldom tells
us anything at all about such mere practical every-day matters as bread
and butter.  To say the truth, he cared but little about them.
Probably he had lived in a very simple penurious style during his whole
studenthood, taking his meals at a cafe or eating-house, and centering
all his affection and ideas upon his beloved studio.  But now wealth
and fame began to crowd in upon him, almost without the seeking.
Visitors to Rome began to frequent the Welshman's rooms, and the death
of "the great and good Canova," which occurred in 1822, while depriving
Gibson of a dearly loved friend, left him, as it were, that great
master's successor. Towards him and Thorwaldsen, indeed, Gibson always
cherished a most filial regard.  "May I not be proud," he writes long
after, "to have known such men, to have conversed with them, watched
all their proceedings, heard all their great sentiments on art?  Is it
not a pleasure to be so deeply in their debt for instruction?"  And now
the flood of visitors who used to flock to Canova's studio began to
transfer their interest to Gibson's.  Commission after commission was
offered him, and he began to make money faster than he could use it.
His life had always been simple and frugal--the life of a working man
with high aims and grand ideals: he hardly knew now how to alter it.
People who did not understand Gibson used to say in his later days that
he loved money, because he made much and spent little.  Those who knew
him better say rather that he worked much for the love of art, and
couldn't find much to do with his money when he had earned it.  He was
singularly indifferent to gain; he cared not what he eat or drank; he
spent little on clothes, and nothing on entertainments; but he paid his
workmen liberally or even lavishly; he allowed one of his brothers more
than he ever spent upon himself, and he treated the other with uniform
kindness and generosity.  The fact is, Gibson didn't understand money,
and when it poured in upon him in large sums, he simply left it in the
hands of friends, who paid him a very small percentage on it, and whom
he always regarded as being very kind to take care of the troublesome
stuff on his account.  In matters of art, Gibson was a great master; in
matters of business, he was hardly more than a simple-minded child.

Sometimes queer incidents occurred at Gibson's studio from the curious
ignorance of our countrymen generally on the subject of art.  One day,
a distinguished and wealthy Welsh gentleman called on the sculptor, and
said that, as a fellow Welshman, he was anxious to give him a
commission.  As he spoke, he cast an admiring eye on Gibson's group of
Psyche borne by the Winds.  Gibson was pleased with his admiration, but
rather taken aback when the old gentleman said blandly, "If you were to
take away the Psyche and put a dial in the place, it'd make a capital
design for a clock." Much later, the first Duke of Wellington called
upon him at Rome and ordered a statue of Pandora, in an attitude which
he described. Gibson at once saw that the Duke's idea was a bad one,
and told him so.  By-and-by, on a visit to England, Gibson waited on
the duke, and submitted photographs of the work he had modelled.  "But,
Mr. Gibson," said the old soldier, looking at them curiously, "you
haven't followed my idea."  "No," answered the sculptor, "I have
followed MY OWN."  "You are very stubborn," said Wellington. "Duke,"
answered the sturdy sculptor, "I am a Welshman, and all the world knows
that we are a stubborn race."  The Iron Duke ought to have been
delighted to find another man as unbending as himself, but he wasn't;
and in the end he refused the figure, which Gibson sold instead to Lady
Marian Alford.

For twenty-seven years Gibson remained at Rome, working assiduously at
his art, and rising gradually but surely to the very first place among
then living sculptors.  His studio now became the great centre of all
fashionable visitors to Rome.  Still, he made no effort to get rich,
though he got rich without wishing it; he worked on merely for art's
sake, not for money.  He would not do as many sculptors do, keep
several copies in marble of his more popular statues for sale; he
preferred to devote all his time to new works.  "Gibson was always
absorbed in one subject," says Lady Eastlake, "and that was the
particular work or part of a work--were it but the turn of a corner of
drapery--which was then under his modelling hands.  Time was nothing to
him; he was long and fastidious."  His favourite pupil, Miss Hosmer,
once expressed regret to him that she had been so long about a piece of
work on which she was engaged.  "Always try to do the best you can,"
Gibson answered.  "Never mind how long you are upon a work--no.  No one
will ask how long you have been, except fools.  You don't care what
fools think."

During his long life at Rome, he was much cheered by the presence and
assistance of his younger brother, Mr. Ben, as he always called him,
who was also a sculptor, though of far less merit than John Gibson
himself.  Mr. Ben came to Rome younger than John, and he learned to be
a great classical scholar, and to read those Greek and Latin books
which John only knew at second hand, but from whose beautiful fanciful
stories of gods and heroes he derived all the subjects for his works of
statuary.  His other brother, Solomon, a strange, wild, odd man, in
whom the family genius had degenerated into mere eccentricity, never
did anything for his own livelihood, but lived always upon John
Gibson's generous bounty.  In John's wealthy days, he and Mr. Ben used
to escape every summer from the heat and dust of Rome--which is
unendurable in July and August--to the delightfully cool air and
magnificent mountain scenery of the Tyrol.  "I cannot tell you how well
I am," he writes on one of these charming visits, "and so is Mr. Ben.
Every morning we take our walks in the woods here.  I feel as if I were
new modelled." Another passage in one of these summer tourist letters
well deserves to be copied here, as it shows the artist's point of view
of labours like Telford's and Stephenson's.  "From Bormio," he says,
"the famous road begins which passes over the Stelvio into the Tyrol;
the highest carriage-road in the world.  We began the ascent early in
the morning.  It is magnificent and wonderful.  Man shows his talents,
his power over great difficulties, in the construction of these roads.
Behold the cunning little workman--he comes, he explores, and he says,
'Yes, I will send a carriage and horses over these mighty mountains;'
and, by Jove, you are drawn up among the eternal snows.  I am a great
admirer of these roads."

In 1844 Gibson paid his first visit to England, a very different
England indeed to the one he had left twenty-seven years earlier. His
Liverpool friends, now thoroughly proud of their stone-cutter, insisted
upon giving him a public banquet.  Glasgow followed the same example;
and the simple-minded sculptor, unaccustomed to such honours, hardly
knew how to bear his blushes decorously upon him. During this visit, he
received a command to execute a statue of the queen.  Gibson was at
first quite disconcerted at such an awful summons.  "I don't know how
to behave to queens," he said.  "Treat her like a lady," said a friend;
and Gibson, following the advice, found it sufficiently answered all
the necessities of the situation.  But when he went to arrange with the
Prince Consort about the statue, he was rather puzzled what he should
do about measuring the face, which he always did for portrait sculpture
with a pair of compasses.  All these difficulties were at last smoothed
over; and Gibson was also permitted to drape the queen's statue in
Greek costume, for in his artistic conscientiousness he absolutely
refused to degrade sculpture by representing women in the fashionable
gown of the day, or men in swallow-tail coats and high collars.

Another work which Gibson designed during this visit possesses for us a
singular and exceptional interest.  It was a statue of George
Stephenson, to be erected at Liverpool.  Thus, by a curious
coincidence, the Liverpool stone-cutter was set to immortalize the
features and figure of the Killingworth engine-man.  Did those two
great men, as they sat together in one room, sculptor and sitter, know
one another's early history and strange struggles, we wonder? Perhaps
not; but if they did, it must surely have made a bond of union between
them.  At any rate, Gibson greatly admired Stephenson, just as he had
admired the Stelvio road.  "I will endeavour to give him a look capable
of action and energy," he said; "but he must be contemplative, grave,
simple.  He is a good subject.  I wish to make him look like an
Archimedes."

If Gibson admired Stephenson, however, he did not wholly admire
Stephenson's railways.  The England he had left was the England of
mail-coaches.  In Italy, he had learnt to travel by carriage, after the
fashion of the country; but these new whizzing locomotives, with their
time-tables, and their precision, and their inscrutable mysteries of
shunts and junctions, were quite too much for his simple, childish,
old-world habits.  He had a knack of getting out too soon or too late,
which often led him into great confusion. Once, when he wanted to go to
Chichester, he found himself landed at Portsmouth, and only discovered
his mistake when, on asking the way to the cathedral, he was told there
was no cathedral in the town at all.  Another story of how he tried to
reach Wentworth, Lord Fitzwilliam's place, is best told in his own
words.  "The train soon stopped at a small station, and, seeing some
people get out, I also descended; when, in a moment, the train moved
on--faster and faster--and left me standing on the platform.  I walked
a few paces backward and forward in disagreeable meditation.  'I wish
to Heaven,' thought I to myself, 'that I was on my way back to Rome
with a postboy.'  Then I observed a policeman darting his eyes upon me,
as if he would look me through.  Said I to the fellow, 'Where is that
cursed train gone to?  It's off with my luggage and here am I.'  The
man asked me the name of the place where I took my ticket.  'I don't
remember,' said I.  'How should I know the name of any of these
places?--it's as long as my arm.  I've got it written down somewhere.'
'Pray, sir,' said the man, after a little pause, 'are you a foreigner?'
'No,' I replied, 'I am not a foreigner; I'm a sculptor.'"

The consequence of this almost childish carelessness was that Gibson
had always to be accompanied on his long journeys either by a friend or
a courier.  While Mr. Ben lived, he usually took his brother in charge
to some extent; and the relation between them was mutual, for while
John Gibson found the sculpture, Mr. Ben found the learning, so that
Gibson used often to call him "my classical dictionary."  In 1847,
however, Mr. Ben was taken ill.  He got a bad cold, and would have no
doctor, take no medicine.  "I consider Mr. Ben," his brother writes,
"as one of the most amiable of human beings--too good for this
world--but he will take no care against colds, and when ill he is a
stubborn animal."  That summer Gibson went again to England, and when,
he came back found Mr. Ben no better.  For four years the younger
brother lingered on, and in 1851 died suddenly from the effects of a
fall in walking.  Gibson was thus left quite alone, but for his pupil
Miss Hosmer, who became to him more than a daughter.

During his later years Gibson took largely to tinting his
statues--colouring them faintly with flesh-tones and other hues like
nature; and this practice he advocated with all the strength of his
single-minded nature.  All visitors to the great Exhibition of 1862
will remember his beautiful tinted Venus, which occupied the place of
honour in a light temple erected for the purpose by another
distinguished artistic Welshman, Mr. Owen Jones, who did much towards
raising the standard of taste in the English people.

In January, 1866, John Gibson had a stroke of paralysis, from which he
never recovered.  He died within the month, and was buried in the
English cemetery at Rome.  Both his brothers had died before him; and
he left the whole of his considerable fortune to the Royal Academy in
England.  An immense number of his works are in the possession of the
Academy, and are on view there throughout the year.

John Gibson's life is very different in many respects from that of most
other great working men whose story is told in this volume.
Undoubtedly, he was deficient in several of those rugged and stern
qualities to which English working men have oftenest owed their final
success.  But there was in him a simple grandeur of character, a purity
of soul, and an earnestness of aim which raised him at once far above
the heads of most among those who would have been the readiest to laugh
at and ridicule him.  Besides his exquisite taste, his severe love of
beauty, and his marvellous power of expressing the highest ideals of
pure form, he had one thing which linked him to all the other great men
whose lives we have here recounted--his steadfast and unconquerable
personal energy.  In one sense it may be said that he was not a
practical man; and yet in another and higher sense, what could possibly
be more practical than this accomplished resolve of the poor Liverpool
stone-cutter to overcome all obstacles, to go to, Rome, and to make
himself into a great sculptor?  It is indeed a pity that in writing for
Englishmen of the present day such a life should even seem for a moment
to stand in need of a practical apology.  For purity, for
guilelessness, for exquisite appreciation of the true purpose of
sculpture as the highest embodiment of beauty of form, John Gibson's
art stands unsurpassed in all the annals of modern statuary.




IV.

WILLIAM HERSCHEL, BANDSMAN.


Old Isaac Herschel, the oboe-player of the King's Guard in Hanover, had
served with his regiment for many years in the chilly climate of North
Germany, and was left at last broken down in health and spirits by the
many hardships of several severe European campaigns. Isaac Herschel was
a man of tastes and education above his position; but he had married a
person in some respects quite unfitted for him.  His good wife, Anna,
though an excellent housekeeper and an estimable woman in her way, had
never even learned to write; and when the pair finally settled down to
old age in Hanover, they were hampered by the cares of a large family
of ten children.  Respectable poverty in Germany is even more pressing
than in England; the decent poor are accustomed to more frugal fare and
greater privations than with us; and the domestic life of the Herschel
family circle must needs have been of the most careful and penurious
description.  Still, Isaac Herschel dearly loved his art, and in it he
found many amends and consolations for the sordid shifts and troubles
of a straitened German household.  All his spare time was given to
music, and in his later days he was enabled to find sufficient pupils
to eke out his little income with comparative comfort.

William Herschel, the great astronomer (born in 1738), was the fourth
child of his mother, and with his brothers he was brought up at the
garrison school in Hanover, together with the sons of the other common
soldiers.  There he learned, not only the three R's, but also a little
French and English.  Still, the boy was not content with these ordinary
studies; in his own playtime he took lessons in Latin and mathematics
privately with the regimental schoolmaster.  The young Herschels,
indeed, were exceptionally fortunate in the possession of an excellent
and intelligent father, who was able to direct their minds into
channels which few people of their position in life have the
opportunity of entering.  Isaac Herschel was partly of Jewish descent,
and he inherited in a marked degree two very striking Jewish gifts--a
turn for music, and a turn for philosophy.  The Jews are probably the
oldest civilized race now remaining on earth; and their musical
faculties have been continuously exercised from a time long before the
days of David, so that now they produce undoubtedly a far larger
proportion of musicians and composers than any other class of the
population whatsoever.  They are also deeply interested in the same
profound theological and philosophical problems which were discussed
with so much acuteness and freedom in the Book of Ecclesiastes and the
subtle argument of Job and his friends.  There has never been a time
when the Jewish mind has not exercised itself profoundly on these deep
and difficult questions; and the Hanover bandsman inherited from his
Jewish ancestry an unusual interest in similar philosophical subjects.
Thus, while the little ones were sleeping in the same common room at
night, William and his father were often heard discussing the ideas of
such abstruse thinkers as Newton and Leibnitz, whose names must have
sounded strange indeed to the ordinary frequenters of the Hanover
barracks.  On such occasions good dame Herschel was often compelled to
interpose between them, lest the loudness of their logic should wake
the younger children in the crib hard by.

William, however, possessed yet another gift, which he is less likely
to have derived from the Jewish side of the house.  He and his brother
Alexander were both distinguished by a natural taste for mechanics, and
early gave proof of their learning by turning neat globes with the
equator and ecliptic accurately engraved upon them, or by making model
instruments for their own amusement out of bits of pasteboard.  Thus,
in early opportunities and educational advantages, the young Herschels
certainly started in life far better equipped than most working men's
sons; and, considering their father's doubtful position, it may seem at
first sight rather a stretch of language to describe him as a working
man at all. Nevertheless, when one remembers the humble grade of
military bandsmen in Germany, even at the present day, and the fact
that most of the Herschel family remained in that grade during all
their lives, it is clear that William Herschel's life may be fairly
included within the scope of the present series.  "In my fifteenth
year," he says himself, "I enlisted in military service," and he
evidently looked upon his enlistment in exactly the same light as that
of any ordinary soldier.

England and Hanover were, of course, very closely connected together at
the middle of the last century.  The king moved about a great deal from
one country to the other; and in 1755 the regiment of Hanoverian Guards
was ordered on service to England for a year. William Herschel, then
seventeen years of age, and already a member of the band, went together
with his father; and it was in this modest capacity that he first made
acquaintance with the land where he was afterwards to attain the
dignity of knighthood and the post of the king's astronomer.  He played
the oboe, like his father before him, and no doubt underwent the usual
severe military discipline of that age of stiff stocks and stern
punishments.  His pay was very scanty, and out of it he only saved
enough to carry home one memento of his English experiences.  That
memento was in itself a sufficient mark of the stuff from which young
Herschel was compounded.  It was a copy of "Locke on the Human
Understanding." Now, Locke's famous work, oftener named than read, is a
very tough and serious bit of philosophical exposition; and a boy of
seventeen who buys such a book out of his meagre earnings as a military
bandsman is pretty sure not to end his life within the four dismal bare
walls of the barrack.  It is indeed a curious picture to imagine young
William Herschel, among a group of rough and boisterous German
soldiers, discussing high mathematical problems with his father, or
sitting down quietly in a corner to read "Locke on the Human
Understanding."

In 1757, during the Seven Years' War, Herschel was sent with his
regiment to serve in the campaign of Rossbach against the French. He
was not physically strong, and the hardships of active service told
terribly upon the still growing lad.  His parents were alarmed at his
appearance when he returned, and were very anxious to "remove" him from
the service.  That, however, was by no means an easy matter for them to
accomplish.  They had no money to buy his discharge, and so, not to
call the transaction by any other than its true name, William Herschel
was forced to run away from the army.  We must not judge too harshly of
this desertion, for the times were hard, and the lives of men in
Herschel's position were valued at very little by the constituted
authorities.  Long after, it is said, when Herschel had distinguished
himself by the discovery of the planet Uranus, a pardon for this high
military offence was duly handed to him by the king in person on the
occasion of his first presentation.  George III. was not a particularly
wise or brilliant man; but even he had sense enough to perceive that
William Herschel could serve the country far better by mapping out the
stars of heaven than by playing the oboe to the royal regiment of
Hanoverian Guards.

William was nineteen when he ran away.  His good mother packed his
boxes for him with such necessaries as she could manage, and sent them
after him to Hamburg; but, to the boy's intense disgust, she forgot to
send the copy of "Locke on the Human Understanding." What a sturdy
deserter we have here, to be sure!  "She, dear woman," he says
plaintively, "knew no other wants than good linen and clothing!"  So
William Herschel the oboe-player started off alone to earn his living
as best he might in the great world of England.  It is strange he
should have chosen that, of all European countries; for there alone he
was liable to be arrested as a deserter: but perhaps his twelvemonth's
stay in London may have given him a sense of being at home amongst us
which he would have lacked in any other part of Europe.  At any rate,
hither he came, and for the next three years picked up a livelihood, we
know not how, as many other excellent German bandsmen have done before
and since him.  Our information about his early life is very meagre,
and at this period we lose sight of him for a while altogether.

About the year 1760, however, we catch another incidental glimpse of
the young musician in his adopted country.  By that time, he had found
himself once more a regular post as oboist to the Durham militia, then
quartered for its muster at Pontefract.  A certain Dr. Miller, an
organist at Doncaster, was dining one evening at the officers' mess;
when his host happened to speak to him in high praise of a young German
they had in their band, who was really, he said, a most remarkable and
spirited performer.  Dr. Miller asked to see (or rather hear) this
clever musician; so Herschel was called up, and made to go through a
solo for the visitor's gratification.  The organist was surprised at
his admirable execution, and asked him on what terms he was engaged to
the Durham militia.  "Only from month to month," Herschel answered.
"Then leave them at the end of your month," said Miller, "and come to
live with me.  I'm a single man; I think we can manage together; and
I'm sure I can get you a better situation."  Herschel frankly accepted
the offer so kindly made, and seems to have lived for much of the next
five years with Miller in his little two-roomed cottage at Doncaster.
Here he took pupils and performed in the orchestra at public concerts,
always in a very quiet and modest fashion.  He also lived for part of
the time with a Mr. Bulman at Leeds, for whom he afterwards generously
provided a place as clerk to the Octagon Chapel at Bath.  Indeed, it is
a very pleasing trait in William Herschel's character that to the end
he was constantly engaged in finding places for his early friends, as
well as for the less energetic or less fortunate members of his own
family.

During these years, Herschel also seems to have given much attention to
the organ, which enabled him to make his next step in life in 1765,
when he was appointed organist at Halifax.  Now, there is a great
social difference between the position of an oboe-player in a band and
a church organist; and it was through his organ-playing that Herschel
was finally enabled to leave his needy hand-to-mouth life in Yorkshire.
A year later, he obtained the post of organist to the Octagon Chapel at
Bath, an engagement which gave him new opportunities of turning his
mind to the studies for which he possessed a very marked natural
inclination.  Bath was in those days not only the most fashionable
watering-place in England, but almost the only fashionable
watering-place in the whole kingdom.  It was, to a certain extent, all
that Brighton, Scarborough, Buxton, and Harrogate are to-day, and
something more. In our own time, when railways and steamboats have so
altered the face of the world, the most wealthy and fashionable English
society resorts a great deal to continental pleasure towns like Cannes,
Nice, Florence, Vichy, Baden, Ems, and Homburg; but in the eighteenth
century it resorted almost exclusively to Bath.  The Octagon Chapel was
in one sense the centre of life in Bath; and through his connection
with it, Herschel was thrown into a far more intelligent and learned
society than that which he had left behind him in still rural
Yorkshire.  New books came early to Bath, and were read and discussed
in the reading-rooms; famous men and women came there, and contributed
largely to the intellectual life of the place; the theatre was the
finest out of London; the Assembly Rooms were famous as the greatest
resort of wit and culture in the whole kingdom.  Herschel here was far
more in his element than in the barracks of Hanover, or in the little
two-roomed cottage at rustic Doncaster.

He worked very hard indeed, and his work soon brought him comfort and
comparative wealth.  Besides his chapel services, and his later
engagement in the orchestra of the Assembly Rooms, he had often as many
as thirty-eight private pupils in music every week; and he also
composed a few pieces, which were published in London with some modest
success.  Still, in spite of all these numerous occupations, the eager
young German found a little leisure time to devote to self-education;
so much so that, after a fatiguing day of fourteen or sixteen hours
spent in playing the organ and teaching, he would "unbend his mind" by
studying the higher mathematics, or give himself a lesson in Greek and
Italian.  At the same time; he was also working away at a line of
study, seemingly useless to him, but in which he was afterwards to earn
so great and deserved a reputation.  Among the books he read during
this Bath period were Smith's "Optics" and Lalande's "Astronomy."
Throughout all his own later writings, the influence of these two
books, thoroughly mastered by constant study in the intervals of his
Bath music lessons, makes itself everywhere distinctly felt.

Meanwhile, the family at Hanover had not been flourishing quite so
greatly as the son William was evidently doing in wealthy England.
During all those years, the young man had never forgotten to keep up a
close correspondence with his people in Germany.  Already, in 1764,
during his Yorkshire days, William Herschel had managed out of his
Savings as an oboe-player to make a short trip to his old home; and his
sister Carolina, afterwards his chief assistant in his astronomical
labours, notes with pleasure the delight she felt in having her beloved
brother with her once more, though she, poor girl, being cook to the
household apparently, could only enjoy his society when she was not
employed "in the drudgery of the scullery."  A year later, when William
had returned to England again, and had just received his appointment as
organist at Halifax, his father, Isaac, had a stroke of paralysis which
ended his violin-playing for ever, and forced him to rely thenceforth
upon copying music for a precarious livelihood.  In 1767 he died, and
poor Carolina saw before her in prospect nothing but a life of that
domestic drudgery which she so disliked.  "I could not bear the idea of
being turned into a housemaid," she says; and she thought that if only
she could take a few lessons in music and fancy work she might get "a
place as governess in some family where the want of a knowledge of
French would be no objection."  But, unhappily, good dame Herschel,
like many other uneducated and narrow-minded persons, had a strange
dread of too much knowledge. She thought that "nothing further was
needed," says Carolina, "than to send me two or three months to a
sempstress to be taught to make household linen; so all that my father
could do was to indulge me sometimes with a short lesson on the violin
when my mother was either in good humour or out of the way.  It was her
certain belief that my brother William would have returned to his
country, and my eldest brother would not have looked so high, if they
had had a little less learning."  Poor, purblind, well-meaning,
obstructive old dame Herschel! what a boon to the world that children
like yours are sometimes seized with this incomprehensible fancy for
"looking too high"!

Nevertheless, Carolina managed by rising early to take a few lessons at
daybreak from a young woman whose parents lived in the same cottage
with hers; and so she got through a little work before the regular
daily business of the family began at seven.  Imagine her delight then,
just as the difficulties after her father's death are making that
housemaid's place seem almost inevitable, when she gets a letter from
William at Bath, asking her to come over to England and join him at
that gay and fashionable city.  He would try to prepare her for singing
at his concerts; but if after two years' trial she didn't succeed, he
would take her back again to Hanover himself.  In 1772, indeed, William
in person came over to fetch her, and thenceforth the brother and
sister worked unceasingly together in all their undertakings to the day
of the great astronomer's death.

About this time Herschel had been reading Ferguson's "Astronomy," and
felt very desirous of seeing for himself the objects in the heavens,
invisible to the naked eye, of which he there found descriptions.  For
this purpose he must of course have a telescope. But how to obtain one?
that was the question.  There was a small two-and-a-half foot
instrument on hire at one of the shops at Bath; and the ambitious
organist borrowed this poor little glass for a time, not merely to look
through, but to use as a model for constructing one on his own account.
Buying was impossible, of course, for telescopes cost much money: but
making would not be difficult for a determined mind.  He had always
been of a mechanical turn, and he was now fired with a desire to build
himself a telescope eighteen or twenty feet long.  He sent to London
for the lenses, which could not be bought at Bath; and Carolina amused
herself by making a pasteboard tube to fit them in her leisure hours.
It was long before he reached twenty feet, indeed: his first effort was
a seven-foot, attained only "after many continuous determined trials."
The amateur pasteboard frame did not fully answer Herschel's
expectations, so he was obliged to go in grudgingly for the expense of
a tin tube.  The reflecting mirror which he ought to have had proved
too dear for his still slender purse, and he thus had to forego it with
much regret.  But he found a man at Bath who had once been in the
mirror-polishing line; and he bought from him for a bargain all his
rubbish of patterns, tools, unfinished mirrors and so forth, with which
he proceeded to experiment on the manufacture of a proper telescope. In
the summer, when the season was over, and all the great people had left
Bath, the house, as Carolina says ruefully, "was turned into a
workshop."  William's younger brother Alexander was busy putting up a
big lathe in a bedroom, grinding glasses and turning eyepieces; while
in the drawing-room itself, sacred to William's aristocratic pupils, a
carpenter, sad to relate, was engaged in making a tube and putting up
stands for the future telescopes.  Sad goings on, indeed, in the family
of a respectable music-master and organist!  Many a good solid
shopkeeper in Bath must no doubt have shaken his grey head solemnly as
he passed the door, and muttered to himself that that young German
singer fellow was clearly going on the road to ruin with his foolish
good-for-nothing star-gazing.

In 1774, when William Herschel was thirty six, he had at last
constructed himself a seven-foot telescope, and began for the first
time in his life to view the heavens in a systematic manner.  From this
he advanced to a ten-foot, and then to one of twenty, for he meant to
see stars that no astronomer had ever yet dreamt of beholding.  It was
comparatively late in life to begin, but Herschel had laid a solid
foundation already and he was enabled therefore to do an immense deal
in the second half of those threescore years and ten which are the
allotted average life of man, but which he himself really overstepped
by fourteen winters. As he said long afterwards with his modest manner
to the poet Campbell, "I have looked further into space than ever human
being did before me.  I have observed stars of which the light, it can
be proved, must take two millions of years to reach this earth."  That
would have been a grand thing for any man to be able truthfully to say
under any circumstances: it was a marvellous thing for a man who had
laboured under all the original disadvantages of Herschel--a man who
began life as a penniless German bandsman, and up to the age of
thirty-six had never even looked through a telescope.

At this time, Herschel was engaged in playing the harpsichord in the
orchestra of the theatre; and it was during the interval between the
acts that he made his first general survey of the heavens.  The moment
his part was finished, he would rush out to gaze through his telescope;
and in these short periods he managed to observe all the visible stars
of what are called the first, second, third, and fourth magnitudes.
Henceforth he went on building telescope after telescope, each one
better than the last; and now all his glasses were ground and polished
either by his own hand or by his brother Alexander's.  Carolina
meanwhile took her part in the workshop; but as she had also to sing at
the oratorios, and her awkward German manners might shock the sensitive
nerves of the Bath aristocrats, she took two lessons a week for a whole
twelvemonth (she tells us in her delightfully straightforward fashion)
"from Miss Fleming, the celebrated dancing mistress, to drill me for a
gentlewoman."  Poor Carolina, there she was mistaken: Miss Fleming
could make her into no gentlewoman, for she was born one already, and
nothing proves it more than the perfect absence of false shame with
which in her memoirs she tells us all these graphic little details of
their early humble days.

While they were thus working at Bath an incident occurred which is
worth mentioning because it shows the very different directions in
which the presence or the want of steady persistence may lead the
various members of the very self-same family.  William received a
letter from his widowed mother at Hanover to say, in deep distress,
that Dietrich, the youngest brother, had run away from home, it was
supposed for the purpose of going to India, "with a young idler no
older than himself."  Forthwith, the budding astronomer left the lathe
where he was busy turning an eye-piece from a cocoa-nut shell, and,
like a good son and brother as he always was, hurried off to Holland
and thence to Hanover.  No Dietrich was anywhere to be found.  But
while he was away, Carolina at Bath received a letter from Dietrich
himself, to tell her ruefully he was "laid up very ill" at a waterside
tavern in Wapping--not the nicest or most savoury East End
sailor-suburb of London.  Alexander immediately took the coach to town,
put the prodigal into a decent lodging, nursed him carefully for a
fortnight, and then took him down with him in triumph to the family
home at Bath.  There brother William found him safe and sound on his
return, under the sisterly care of good Carolina.  A pretty dance he
had led the two earnest and industrious astronomers; but they seem
always to have treated this black sheep of the family with uniform
kindness, and long afterwards Sir William remembered him favourably in
his last will.

In 1779 and the succeeding years the three Herschels were engaged
during all their spare time in measuring the heights of about one
hundred mountains in the moon, which William gauged by three different
methods.  In the same year, he made an acquaintance of some importance
to him, as forming his first introduction to the wider world of science
in London and elsewhere.  Dr. Watson, a Fellow of the Royal Society,
happened, to see him working at his telescope; and this led to a visit
from the electrician to the amateur astronomer.  Dr. Watson was just
then engaged in getting up a Philosophical Society at Bath (a far rarer
institution at that time in a provincial town than now), and he invited
William Herschel to join it.  Here Herschel learned for the first time
to mix with those who were more nearly his intellectual equals, and to
measure his strength against other men's.

It was in 1781 that Herschel made the great discovery which immediately
established his fame as an astronomer, and enabled him to turn from
conducting concerts to the far higher work of professionally observing
the stars.  On the night of Tuesday, March 13th, Herschel was engaged
in his usual systematic survey of the sky, a bit at a time, when his
telescope lighted among a group of small fixed stars upon what he at
first imagined to be a new comet. It proved to be no comet, however,
but a true planet--a veritable world, revolving like our own in a
nearly circular path around the sun as centre, though far more remote
from it than the most distant planet then known, Saturn.  Herschel
called his new world the Georgium Sidus (King George's star) in honour
of the reigning monarch; but it has since been known as Uranus.
Astronomers all over Europe were soon apprised of this wonderful
discovery, and the path of the freshly found planet was computed by
calculation, its distance from the sun being settled at nineteen times
that of our own earth.

In order faintly to understand the importance attached at the time to
Herschel's observation of this very remote and seemingly petty world,
we must remember that up to that date all the planets which circle
round our own sun had been familiarly known to everybody from time
immemorial.  To suggest that there was yet another world belonging to
our system outside the path of the furthest known planet would have
seemed to most people like pure folly.  Since then, we have grown quite
accustomed to the discovery of a fresh small world or two every year,
and we have even had another large planet (Neptune), still more remote
than Herschel's Uranus, added to the list of known orbs in our own
solar system.  But in Herschel's day, nobody had ever heard of a new
planet being discovered since the beginning of all things.  A hundred
years before, an Italian astronomer, it is true, had found out four
small moons revolving round Saturn, besides the big moon then already
known; but for a whole century, everybody believed that the solar
system was now quite fully explored, and that nothing fresh could be
discovered about it.  Hence Herschel's observation produced a very
different effect from, say, the discovery of the two moons which
revolve round Mars, in our own day.  Even people who felt no interest
in astronomy were aroused to attention.  Mr. Herschel's new planet
became the talk of the town and the subject of much admiring discussion
in the London newspapers.  Strange, indeed, that an amateur astronomer
of Bath, a mere German music-master, should have hit upon a planet
which escaped the sight even of the king's own Astronomer Royal at
Greenwich.

Of course there were not people wanting who ascribed this wonderful
discovery of Herschel's to pure chance.  If he hadn't just happened to
turn his telescope in that particular direction on that particular
night, he wouldn't have seen this Georgium Sidus they made such a fuss
about at all.  Quite so.  And if he hadn't built a twenty-foot
telescope for himself, he wouldn't have turned it anywhere at any time.
But Herschel himself knew better.  "This was by no means the result of
chance," he said; "but a simple consequence of the position of the
planet on that particular evening, since it occupied precisely that
spot in the heavens which came in the order of the minute observations
that I had previously mapped out for myself.  Had I not seen it just
when I did, I must inevitably have come upon it soon after, since my
telescope was so perfect that I was able to distinguish it from a fixed
star in the first minute of observation."  Indeed, when once Herschel's
twenty-foot telescope was made, he could not well have failed in the
long run to discover Uranus, as his own description of his method
clearly shows.  "When I had carefully and thoroughly perfected the
great instrument in all its parts," he says, "I made a systematic use
of it in my observation of the heaven, first forming a determination
never to pass by any, the smallest, portion of them without due
investigation.  This habit, persisted in, led to the discovery of the
new planet (Georgium Sidus)."  As well might one say that a skilled
mining surveyor, digging for coal, came upon the seam by chance, as
ascribe to chance the necessary result of such a careful and methodical
scrutiny as this.

Before the year was out, the ingenious Mr. Herschel of Bath was elected
a Fellow of the Royal Society, and was also presented with the Copley
gold medal.  From this moment all the distinguished people in Bath were
anxious to be introduced to the philosophical music-master; and,
indeed, they intruded so much upon his time that the daily music
lessons were now often interrupted.  He was soon, however, to give up
lessons for ever, and devote himself to his more congenial and natural
work in astronomy.  In May, 1782, he went up to London, to be formally
admitted to his Fellowship of the Royal Society.  There he stayed so
long that poor Carolina was quite frightened.  It was "double the time
which my brother could safely be absent from his scholars."  The
connection would be broken up, and the astronomy would be the ruin of
the family.  (A little of good old dame Herschel's housewifely leaven
here, perhaps.)  But William's letters from London to "Dear Lina" must
soon have quieted her womanly fears.  William had actually been
presented to the king, and "met with a very gracious reception." He had
explained the solar system to the king and queen, and his telescope was
to be put up first at Greenwich and then at Richmond. The Greenwich
authorities were delighted with his instrument; they have seen what
Herschel calls "MY fine double stars" with it.  "All my papers are
printing," he tells Lina with pardonable pride, "and are allowed to be
very valuable."  But he himself is far from satisfied as yet with the
results of his work.  Evidently no small successes in the field of
knowledge will do for William Herschel. "Among opticians and
astronomers," he writes to Lina, "nothing now is talked of but WHAT
THEY CALL my great discoveries.  Alas! this shows how far they are
behind, when such trifles as I have seen and done are called GREAT.
Let me but get at it again!  I will make such telescopes and see such
things!"  Well, well, William Herschel, in that last sentence we get
the very keynote of true greatness and true genius.

But must he go back quietly to Bath and the toils of teaching? "An
intolerable waste of time," he thought it.  The king happily relieved
him from this intolerable waste.  He offered Herschel a salary of 200
pounds a year if he would come and live at Datchet, and devote himself
entirely to astronomical observations.  It was by no means a munificent
sum for a king to offer for such labour; but Herschel gladly accepted
it, as it would enable him to give up the interruption of teaching, and
spend all his time on his beloved astronomy.  His Bath friend, Sir
William Watson, exclaimed when he heard of it, "Never bought monarch
honour so cheap."  Herschel was forty-three when he removed to Datchet,
and from that day forth he lived almost entirely in his observatory,
wholly given up to his astronomical pursuits.  Even when he had to go
to London to read his papers before the Royal Society, he chose a
moonlight night (when the stars would be mostly invisible), so that it
might not interfere with his regular labours.

Poor Carolina was horrified at the house at Datchet, which seemed
terribly desolate and poor, even to her modest German ideas; but
William declared his willingness to live permanently and cheerfully
upon "eggs and bacon" now that he was at last free to do nothing on
earth but observe the heavens.  Night after night he and Carolina
worked together at their silent task--he noting the small features with
his big telescope, she "sweeping for comets" with a smaller glass or
"finder."  Herschel could have had no more useful or devoted assistant
than his sister, who idolized him with all her heart.  Alexander, too,
came to stay with them during the slack months at Bath, and then the
whole strength of the family was bent together on their labour of love
in gauging the heavens.

But what use was it all?  Why should they wish to go star-gazing? Well,
if a man cannot see for himself what use it was, nobody else can put
the answer into him, any more than they could put into him a love for
nature, or for beauty, or for art, or for music, if he had it not to
start with.  What is the good of a great picture, a splendid oratorio,
a grand poem?  To the man who does not care for them, nothing; to the
man who loves them, infinite.  It is just the same with science.  The
use of knowledge to a mind like Herschel's is the mere possession of
it.  With such as he, it is a love, an object of desire, a thing to be
sought after for its town sake; and the mere act of finding it is in
itself purely delightful.  "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and
the man that getteth understanding.  For the merchandise of it is
better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine
gold.  She is more precious than rubies; and all the things thou canst
desire are not to be compared unto her."  So, to such a man as
Herschel, that peaceful astronomer life at Datchet was indeed, in the
truest sense of those much-abused words, "success in life."  If you had
asked some vulgar-minded neighbour of the great Sir William in his
later days whether the astronomer had been a successful man or not, he
would doubtless have answered, after his kind, "Certainly.  He has been
made a knight, has lands in two counties, and has saved 35,000 pounds."
But if you had asked William Herschel himself, he would probably have
said, with his usual mixture of earnestness and humility, "Yes, I have
been a very fortunate man in life.  I have discovered Uranus, and I
have gauged all the depths of heaven, as none before ever gauged them,
with my own great telescope."

Still, those who cannot sympathize with the pure love of knowledge for
its own sake--one of the highest and noblest of human aims--should
remember that astronomy is also of immense practical importance to
mankind, and especially to navigation and commerce. Unless great
astronomical calculations were correctly performed at Greenwich and
elsewhere, it would be impossible for any ship or steamer to sail with
safety from England to Australia or America. Every defect in our
astronomical knowledge helps to wreck our vessels on doubtful coasts;
every advance helps to save the lives of many sailors and the cargoes
of many merchants.  It is this practical utility of astronomy that
justifies the spending of national money on observatories and transits
of Venus, and it is the best apology for an astronomer's life to those
who do not appreciate the use of knowledge for its own beauty.

At Datchet, Herschel not only made several large telescopes for sale,
for which he obtained large prices, but he also got a grant of 2000
pounds from the king to aid him in constructing his huge forty-foot
instrument.  It was here, too, in 1783, that Herschel married.  His
wife was a widow lady of scientific tastes like his own, and she was
possessed of considerable means, which enabled him henceforth to lay
aside all anxiety on the score of money.  They had but one child, a
son, afterwards Sir John Herschel, almost as great an astronomer as his
father had been before him.  In 1785, the family moved to Clay Hall, in
Old Windsor, and in 1786 to Slough, where Herschel lived for the
remainder of his long life. How completely his whole soul was bound up
in his work is shown in the curious fact recorded for us by Carolina
Herschel.  The last night at Clay Hall was spent in sweeping the sky
with the great glass till daylight; and by the next evening the
telescope stood ready for observations once more in the new home at
Slough.

To follow Herschel through the remainder of his life would be merely to
give a long catalogue of his endless observations and discoveries among
the stars.  Such a catalogue would be interesting only to astronomers;
yet it would truly give the main facts of Herschel's existence in his
happy home at Slough.  Honoured by the world, dearly loved in his own
family, and engrossed with a passionate affection for his chosen
science, the great astronomer and philosopher grew grey in peace under
his own roof, in the course of a singularly placid and gentle old age.
In 1802 he laid before the Royal Society a list of five thousand new
stars, star-clusters, or other heavenly bodies which he had discovered,
and which formed the great body of his personal additions to
astronomical knowledge.  The University of Oxford made him Doctor of
Laws, and very late in life he was knighted by the king--a too tardy
acknowledgment of his immense services to science.  To the very last,
however, he worked on with a will; and, indeed, it is one of the great
charms of scientific interest that it thus enables a man to keep his
faculties on the alert to an advanced old age. In 1819, when Herschel
was more than eighty, he writes to his sister a short note--"Lina,
there is a great comet.  I want you to assist me.  Come to dine and
spend the day here.  If you can come soon after one o'clock, we shall
have time to prepare maps and telescopes.  I saw its situation last
night.  It has a long tail." How delightful to find such a living
interest in life at the age of eighty!

On the 25th of August, 1822, this truly great and simple man passed
away, in his eighty-fifth year.  It has been possible here only to
sketch out the chief personal points in his career, without dwelling
much upon the scientific importance of his later life-long labours; but
it must suffice to say briefly upon this point that Herschel's work was
no mere mechanical star-finding; it was the most profoundly
philosophical astronomical work ever performed, except perhaps Newton's
and Laplace's.  Among astronomers proper there has been none
distinguished by such breadth of grasp, such wide conceptions, and such
perfect clearness of view as the self-taught oboe-player of Hanover.




V.

JEAN FRANCOIS MILLET, PAINTER.


There is no part of France so singularly like England, both in the
aspect of the country itself and in the features and character of the
inhabitants, as Normandy.  The wooded hills and dales, the frequent
copses and apple orchards, the numerous thriving towns and villages,
the towers and steeples half hidden among the trees, recall at every
step the very similar scenery of our own beautiful and fruitful
Devonshire.  And as the land is, so are the people. Ages ago, about the
same time that the Anglo-Saxon invaders first settled down in England,
a band of similar English pirates, from the old common English home by
the cranberry marshes of the Baltic, drove their long ships upon the
long rocky peninsula of the Cotentin, which juts out, like a French
Cornwall, from the mainland of Normandy up to the steep cliffs and
beetling crags of busy Cherbourg.  There they built themselves little
hamlets and villages of true English type, whose very names to this day
remind one of their ancient Saxon origin.  Later on, the Danes or
Northmen conquered the country, which they called after their own name,
Normandy, that is to say, the Northmen's land.  Mixing with the early
Saxon or English settlers, and with the still more primitive Celtic
inhabitants, the Northmen founded a race extremely like that which now
inhabits our own country.  To this day, the Norman peasants of the
Cotentin retain many marks of their origin and their half-forgotten
kinship with the English race.  While other Frenchmen are generally
dark and thick-set, the Norman is, as a rule, a tall, fair-haired,
blue-eyed man, not unlike in build to our Yarmouth fisherman, or our
Kentish labourers.  In body and mind, there is something about him even
now which makes him seem more nearly akin to us than the true Frenchmen
who inhabit almost all the rest of France.

In the village of Gruchy, near Greville, in this wild and beautiful
region of the Cotentin, there lived at the beginning of the present
century a sturdy peasant family of the name of Millet.  The father of
the family was one of the petty village landholders so common in
France; a labourer who owned and tilled his own tiny patch of farm,
with the aid of his wife and children.  We have now no class in England
exactly answering to the French peasant proprietors, who form so large
and important an element in the population just across the Channel.
The small landholder in France belongs by position to about the same
level as our own agricultural labourer, and in many ways is content
with a style of dress and a mode of living against which English
labourers would certainly protest with horror.  And yet, he is a
proprietor, with a proprietor's sense of the dignity of his position,
and an ardent love of his own little much-subdivided corner of
agricultural land.  On this he spends all his energies, and however
many children he may have, he will try to make a livelihood for all by
their united labour out of the soil, rather than let one of them go to
seek his fortune by any other means in the great cities.  Thus the
ground is often tilled up to an almost ridiculous extent, the entire
labour of the family being sometimes expended in cultivating, manuring,
weeding, and tending a patch of land perhaps hardly an acre in size.
It is quite touching to see the care and solicitude with which these
toilsome peasants will laboriously lay out their bit of garden with
fruits or vegetables, making every line almost mathematically regular,
planting every pea at a measured distance, or putting a smooth flat
pebble under every strawberry on the evenly ridged-up vines.  It is
only in the very last resort that the peasant proprietor will consent
to let one of his daughters go out to service, or send one of his sons
adrift to seek his fortune as an artisan in the big, unknown, outer
world.

Millet the elder, however, had nine children, which is an unusually
large number for a French peasant family (where the women ordinarily
marry late in life); and his little son Jean Francois (the second child
and eldest boy), though set to weed and hoe upon the wee farm in his
boyhood, was destined by his father for some other life than that of a
tiller of the soil.  He was born in the year before Waterloo--1814--and
was brought up on his father's plot of land, in the hard rough way to
which peasant children in France are always accustomed.  Bronzed by sun
and rain, poorly clad, and ill-fed, he acquired as a lad, from the open
air and the toilsome life he led, a vigour of constitution which
enabled him to bear up against the numerous hardships and struggles of
his later days.  "A Norman Peasant," he loved to call himself always,
with a certain proud humility; and happily he had the rude health of
one all his life long.

Hard as he worked, little Francois' time was not entirely taken up with
attending to the fields or garden.  He was a studious boy, and learned
not only to read and write in French, but also to try some higher
flights, rare indeed for a lad of his position.  His family possessed
remarkable qualities as French peasants go; and one of his
great-uncles, a man of admirable strength of character, a priest in the
days of the great Revolution, had braved the godless republicans of his
time, and though deprived of his cure, and compelled to labour for his
livelihood in the fields, had yet guided the plough in his priestly
garments.  His grandmother first taught him his letters; and when she
had instructed him to the length of reading any French book that was
put before him, the village priest took him in hand.  In France, the
priest comes often from the peasant class, and remains in social
position a member of that class as long as he lives.  But he always
possesses a fair knowledge of Latin, the language in which all his
religious services are conducted; and this knowledge serves as a key to
much that his unlearned parishioners could never dream of knowing.
Young Millet's parish priest taught him as much Latin as he knew
himself; and so the boy was not only able to read the Bible in the
Latin or Vulgate translation, but also to make acquaintance with the
works of Virgil and several others of the great Roman poets. He read,
too, the beautiful "Confessions" of St. Augustine, and the "Lives of
the Saints," which he found in his father's scanty library, as well as
the works of the great French preachers, Bossuet and Fenelon.  Such
early acquaintance with these and many other masterpieces of higher
literature, we may be sure, helped greatly to mould the lad's mind into
that grand and sober shape which it finally acquired.

Jean Francois' love of art was first aroused by the pictures in an old
illustrated Bible which belonged to his father, and which he was
permitted to look at on Sundays and festivals.  The child admired these
pictures immensely, and asked leave to be permitted to copy them.  The
only time he could find for the purpose, however, was that of the
mid-day rest or siesta.  It is the custom in France, as in Southern
Europe generally, for labourers to cease from work for an hour or so in
the middle of the day; and during this "tired man's holiday," young
Millet, instead of resting, used to take out his pencil and paper, and
try his hand at reproducing the pictures in the big Bible.  His father
was not without an undeveloped taste for art.  "See," he would say,
looking into some beautiful combe or glen on the hillside--"see that
little cottage half buried in the trees; how beautiful it is!  I think
it ought to be drawn so--;" and then he would make a rough sketch of it
on some scrap of paper.  At times he would model things with a bit of
clay, or cut the outline of a flower or an animal with his knife on a
flat piece of wood.  This unexercised talent Francois inherited in a
still greater degree.  As time went on, he progressed to making little
drawings on his own account; and we may be sure the priest and all the
good wives of Gruchy had quite settled in their own minds before long
that Jean Francois Millet's hands would be able in time to paint quite
a beautiful altar-piece for the village church.

By-and-by, when the time came for Francois to choose a trade, he being
then a big lad of about nineteen, it was suggested to his father that
young Millet might really make a regular painter--that is to say, an
artist.  In France, the general tastes of the people are far more
artistic than with us; and the number of painters who find work for
their brushes in Paris is something immensely greater than the number
in our own smoky, money-making London.  So there was nothing very
remarkable, from a French point of view, in the idea of the young
peasant turning for a livelihood to the profession of an artist.  But
Millet's father was a sober and austere man, a person of great dignity
and solemnity, who decided to put his son's powers to the test in a
very regular and critical fashion.  He had often watched Francois
drawing, and he thought well of the boy's work.  If he had a real
talent for painting, a painter he should be; if not, he must take to
some other craft, where he would have the chance of making himself a
decent livelihood.  So he told Francois to prepare a couple of
drawings, which he would submit to the judgment of M. Mouchel, a local
painter at Cherbourg, the nearest large town, and capital of the
department.  Francois duly prepared the drawings, and Millet the elder
went with his, son to submit them in proper form for M. Mouchel's
opinion.  Happily, M. Mouchel had judgment enough to see at a glance
that the drawings possessed remarkable merit.  "You must be playing me
a trick," he said; "that lad could never have made these drawings."  "I
saw him do them with my own eyes," answered the father warmly.  "Then,"
said Mouchel, "all I can say is this: he has in him the making of a
great painter."  He accepted Millet as his pupil; and the young man set
off for Cherbourg accordingly, to study with care and diligence under
his new master.

Cherbourg, though not yet at that time a great naval port, as it
afterwards became, was a busy harbour and fishing town, where the young
artist saw a great deal of a kind of life with which he possessed an
immense sympathy.  The hard work of the fishermen putting out to sea on
stormy evenings, or toiling with their nets ashore after a sleepless
night, made a living picture which stamped itself deeply on his
receptive mind.  A man of the people himself, born to toil and inured
to it from babyhood, this constant scene of toiling and struggling
humanity touched the deepest chord in his whole nature, so that some of
the most beautiful and noble of his early pictures are really
reminiscences of his first student days at Cherbourg.  But after he had
spent a year in Mouchel's studio, sad news came to him from Gruchy.
His father was dying, and Francois was only just in time to see him
before he passed away. If the family was to be kept together at all,
Francois must return from his easel and palette, and take once more to
guiding the plough.  With that earnest resolution which never forsook
him, Millet decided to accept the inevitable.  He went back home once
more, and gave up his longings for art in order to till the ground for
his fatherless sisters.

Luckily, however, his friends at Gruchy succeeded after awhile in
sending him back again to Cherbourg, where he began to study under
another master, Langlois, and to have hopes once more for his artistic
future, now that he was free at last to pursue it in his own way.  At
this time, he read a great deal--Shakespeare, Walter Scott, Byron,
Goethe's "Faust," Victor Hugo and Chateaubriand; in fact, all the great
works he could lay his hands upon.  Peasant as he was, he gave himself,
half unconsciously, a noble education. Very soon, it became apparent
that the Cherbourg masters could do nothing more for him, and that, if
he really wished to perfect himself in art, he must go to Paris.  In
France, the national interest felt in painting is far greater and more
general than in England.  Nothing is commoner than for towns or
departments to grant pensions (or as we should call them, scholarships)
to promising lads who wish to study art in Paris.  Young Millet had
attracted so much attention at Cherbourg, that the Council General of
the Department of the Manche voted him a present of six hundred francs
(about 24 pounds) to start him on the way; and the town of Cherbourg
promised him an annual grant of four hundred francs more (about 16
pounds).  So up to Paris Millet went, and there was duly enrolled as a
student at the Government "School of Fine-Arts."

Those student days in Paris were days of hunger and cold, very often,
which Millet bore with the steady endurance of a Norman peasant boy.
But they were also days of something worse to him--of effort
misdirected, and of constant struggling against a system for which he
was not fitted.  In fact, Millet was an original genius, whereas the
teachers at the School of Fine Arts were careful and methodical
rule-of-thumb martinets.  They wished to train Millet into the ordinary
pattern, which he could not follow; and in the end, he left the school,
and attached himself to the studio of Paul Delaroche, then the greatest
painter of historical pictures in all Paris.  But even Delaroche,
though an artist of deep feeling and power, did not fully understand
his young Norman pupil.  He himself used to paint historical pictures
in the grand style, full of richness and beauty; but his subjects were
almost always chosen from the lives of kings or queens, and treated
with corresponding calmness and dignity.  "The Young Princes in the
Tower," "The Execution of Marie Antoinette," "The Death of Queen
Elizabeth," "Cromwell viewing the Body of Charles I."--these were the
kind of pictures on which Delaroche loved to employ himself.  Millet,
on the other hand, though also full of dignity and pathos, together
with an earnestness far surpassing Delaroche's, did not care for these
lofty subjects.  It was the dignity and pathos of labour that moved him
most; the silent, weary, noble lives of the uncomplaining peasants,
amongst whom his own days had been mostly passed. Delaroche could not
make him out at all; he was such a curious, incomprehensible, odd young
fellow!  "There, go your own way, if you will," the great master said
to him at last; "for my part, I can make nothing of you."

So, shortly after, Millet and his friend Marolle set up a studio for
themselves in the Rue de l'Est in Paris.  The precise occasion of their
going was this.  Millet was anxious to obtain the Grand Prize of Rome
annually offered to the younger artists, and Delaroche definitely told
him that his own influence would be used on behalf of another pupil.
After this, the young Norman felt that he could do better by following
out his own genius in his own fashion.  At the Rue de l'Est, he
continued to study hard, but he also devoted a large part of his time
to painting cheap portraits--what artists call "pot-boilers;" mere
hasty works dashed off anyhow to earn his daily livelihood.  For these
pictures he got about ten to fifteen francs apiece,--in English money
from eight to twelve shillings.  They were painted in a theatrical
style, which Millet himself detested--all pink cheeks, and red lips,
and blue satin, and lace collars; whereas his own natural style was one
of great austerity and a certain earnest sombreness the exact reverse
of the common Parisian taste to which he ministered.  However, he had
to please his patrons--and, like a sensible man, he went on producing
these cheap daubs to any extent required, for a living, while he
endeavoured to perfect himself meanwhile for the higher art he was
meditating for the future.  In the great galleries of the Louvre at
Paris he found abundant models which he could study in the works of the
old masters; and there, poring over Michael Angelo and Mantegna, he
could recompense himself a little in his spare hours for the time he
was obliged to waste on pinky-white faces and taffeta gowns.  To an
artist by nature there is nothing harder than working perforce against
the bent of one's own innate and instinctive feelings.

In 1840, Millet found his life in Paris still so hard that he seemed
for a time inclined to give up the attempt, and returned to Greville,
where he painted a marine subject of the sort that was dearest to his
heart--a group of sailors mending a sail.  Shortly after, however, he
was back in Paris--the record of these years of hard struggle is not
very clear--with his wife, a Cherbourg girl whom he had imprudently
married while still barely able to support himself in the utmost
poverty.  It was not till 1844 that the hard-working painter at last
achieved his first success.  It was with a picture of a milkwoman, one
of his own favourite peasant subjects; and the poetry and sympathy
which he had thrown into so commonplace a theme attracted the attention
of many critics among the cultivated Parisian world of art.  The
"Milkwoman" was exhibited at the Salon (the great annual exhibition of
works of art in Paris, like that of the Royal Academy in London, but on
a far larger scale); and several good judges of art began immediately
to inquire, "Who is Jean Francois Millet?"  Hunting his address out, a
party of friendly critics presented themselves at his lodgings, only to
learn that Madame Millet had just died, and that her husband, half in
despair, had gone back again once more to his native Norman hills and
valleys.

But Millet was the last man on earth to sit down quietly with his hands
folded, waiting for something or other to turn up.  At Cherbourg, he
set to work once more, no doubt painting more "pot-boilers" for the
respectable shopkeepers of the neighbourhood--complacent portraits,
perhaps, of a stout gentleman with a large watch-chain fully displayed,
and of a stout lady in a black silk dress and with a vacant smile; and
by hook or by crook he managed to scrape together a few hundred francs,
with which once more he might return to Paris.  But before he did so,
he married again, this time more wisely.  His wife, Catharine Lemaire,
was a brave and good woman, who knew how to appreciate her husband, and
to second him well in all his further struggles and endeavours.  They
went for a while to Havre, where Millet, in despair of getting better
work, and not ashamed of doing anything honest to pay his way, actually
took to painting sign-boards.  In this way he saved money enough to
make a fresh start in Paris.  There, he continued his hard battle
against the taste of the time; for French art was then dominated by the
influence of men like Delaroche, or like Delacroix and Horace Vernet,
who had accustomed the public to pictures of a very lofty, a very
romantic, or a very fiery sort; and there were few indeed who cared for
stern and sympathetic delineations of the French peasant's unlovely
life of unremitting toil, such as Millet loved to set before them.
Yet, in spite of discouragement, he did well to follow out this inner
prompting of his own soul; for in that direction he could do his best
work--and the best work is always the best worth doing in the long run.
There are some minds, of which Franklin's is a good type, so versatile
and so shifty that they can turn with advantage to any opening that
chances to offer, no matter in what direction; and such minds do right
in seizing every opportunity, wherever it occurs.  But there are other
minds, of which Gibson and Millet are excellent examples, naturally
restricted to certain definite lines of thought or work; and such minds
do right in persistently following up their own native talent, and
refusing to be led aside by circumstances into any less natural or less
promising channel.

While living in Paris at this time, Millet painted several of his
favourite peasant pictures, amongst others "The Workman's Monday,"
which is a sort of parallel in painting to Burns's "Cotter's Saturday
Night" in poetry.  Indeed, there is a great deal in Millet which
strongly reminds one at every step of Burns.  Both were born of the
agricultural labouring class; both remained peasants at heart, in
feelings and sympathies, all their lives long; neither was ashamed of
his origin, even in the days of his greatest fame; painter and poet
alike loved best to choose their themes from the simple life of the
poor whose trials and hardships they knew so well by bitter experience;
and in each case they succeeded best in touching the hearts of others
when they did not travel outside their own natural range of subjects.
Only (if Scotchmen will allow one to say so) there was in Millet a far
deeper vein of moral earnestness than in Burns; he was more profoundly
impressed by the dignity and nobility of labour; in his tender sympathy
there was a touch of solemn grandeur which was wanting in the too
genial and easy-going Ayrshire ploughman.

In 1848, the year of revolutions, Millet painted his famous picture of
"The Winnower," since considered as one of his finest works. Yet for a
long time, though the critics praised it, it could not find a
purchaser; till at last M. Ledru Rollin, a well-known politician,
bought it for what Millet considered the capital price of five hundred
francs (about 20 pounds).  It would now fetch a simply fabulous price,
if offered for sale.  Soon after this comparative success Millet
decided to leave Paris, where the surroundings indeed were little
fitted to a man of his peculiarly rural and domestic tastes.  He would
go where he might see the living models of his peasant friends for ever
before him; where he could watch them leaning over the plough pressed
deep into the earth; cutting the faggots with stout arms in the
thick-grown copses; driving the cattle home at milking time with weary
feet, along the endless, straight white high-roads of the French rural
districts.  At the same time, he must be within easy reach of Paris;
for though he had almost made up his mind not to exhibit any more at
the Salon--people didn't care to see his reapers or his fishermen--he
must still manage to keep himself within call of possible purchasers;
and for this purpose he selected the little village of Barbizon, on the
edge of the forest of Fontainebleau.

The woods of Fontainebleau stand to Paris in somewhat the same relation
that Windsor Great Park stands to London; only, the scenery is more
forest-like, and the trees are big and antique looking.  By the
outskirts of this great wood stands the pretty hamlet of Barbizon, a
single long street of small peasant cottages, built with the usual
French rural disregard of beauty or cleanliness.  At the top of the
street, in a little three-roomed house, the painter and his wife
settled down quietly; and here they lived for twenty-seven years, long
after Millet's name had grown to be famous in the history of
contemporary French painting.  An English critic, who visited the spot
in the days of Millet's greatest celebrity, was astonished to find the
painter, whom he had come to see, strolling about the village in rustic
clothes, and even wearing the sabots or wooden shoes which are in
France the social mark of the working classes, much as the smock-frock
used once to be in the remoter country districts of England.  Perhaps
this was a little bit of affectation on Millet's part--a sort of proud
declaration of the fact that in spite of fame and honours he still
insisted upon counting himself a simple peasant; but if so, it was,
after all, a very pretty and harmless affectation indeed. Better to see
a man sticking pertinaciously to his wooden shoes, than turning his
back upon old friends and old associations in the days of his worldly
prosperity.

At Barbizon Millet's life moved on so quietly that there is nothing to
record in it almost, save a long list of pictures painted, and a
gradual growth, not in popularity (for THAT Millet never really
attained at all), but in the esteem of the best judges, which of course
brought with it at last, first ease, then comfort, and finally
comparative riches.  Millet was able now to paint such subjects as
pleased him best, and he threw himself into his work with all the
fervour of his intensely earnest and poetical nature. Whatever might be
the subject which he undertook, he knew how to handle it so that it
became instinct with his own fine feeling for the life he saw around
him.  In 1852 he painted his "Man spreading Manure."  In itself, that
is not a very exalted or beautiful occupation; but what Millet saw in
it was the man, not the manure--the toiling, sorrowing, human
fellow-being, whose labour and whose spirit he knew so well how to
appreciate.  And in this view of the subject he makes us all at once
sympathize.  Other pictures of this period are such as "The Gleaners,"
"The Reapers," "A Peasant grafting a Tree," "The Potato Planters," and
so forth.  These were very different subjects indeed from the dignified
kings and queens painted by Delaroche, or the fiery battle-pieces of
Delacroix but they touch a chord in our souls which those great
painters fail to strike, and his treatment of them is always truthful,
tender, melancholy, and exquisite.

Bit by bit, French artistic opinion began to recognize the real
greatness of the retiring painter at Barbizon.  He came to be looked
upon as a true artist, and his pictures sold every year for
increasingly large prices.  Still, he had not been officially
recognized; and in France, where everything, even to art and the
theatre, is under governmental regulation, this want of official
countenance is always severely felt.  At last, in 1867, Millet was
awarded the medal of the first class, and was appointed a Chevalier of
the Legion of Honour.  The latter distinction carries with it the right
to wear that little tag of ribbon on the coat which all Frenchmen prize
so highly; for to be "decorated," as it is called, is in France a spur
to ambition of something the same sort as a knighthood or a peerage in
England, though of course it lies within the reach of a far greater
number of citizens.  There is something to our ideas rather absurd in
the notion of bestowing such a tag of ribbon on a man of Millet's aims
and occupations; but all honours are honours just according to the
estimation of the man who receives them and the society in which he
lives; and Millet no doubt prized his admission to the Legion of Honour
all the more because it had been so long delayed and so little truckled
for.

To the end of his days, Millet never left his beloved Barbizon. He
stopped there, wandering about the fields, watching peasants at work,
imprinting their images firmly upon his eye and brain, and then going
home again to put the figures he had thus observed upon his vivid
canvas.  For, strange to say, unlike almost every other great painter,
Millet never painted from a model.  Instead of getting a man or woman
to sit for him in the pose he required, he would go out into the
meadows and look at the men and women at their actual daily
occupations; and so keen and acute was his power of observation, and so
retentive was his inner eye, that he could then recall almost every
detail of action or manner as clearly as if he had the original present
in his studio before him.  As a rule, such a practice is not to be
recommended to any one who wishes to draw with even moderate accuracy;
constant study of the actual object, and frequent comparison by
glancing from object to copy, are absolutely necessary for forming a
correct draughtsman. But Millet knew his own way best; and how
wonderfully minute and painstaking must his survey have been when it
enabled him to reproduce the picture of a person afterwards in every
detail of dress or movement.

He did not paint very fast.  He preferred doing good work to much
work--an almost invariable trait of all the best workmen.  During the
thirty-one years that he worked independently, he produced only eighty
pictures--not more, on an average, than two or three a year. Compared
with the rate at which most successful artists cover canvas to sell,
this was very slow.  But then, Millet did not paint mainly to sell; he
painted to satisfy his own strict ideas of what constituted the highest
art.  His pictures are usually very simple in their theme; take, for
example, his "Angelus," painted at the height of his fame, in 1867.  A
man and a woman are working in the fields--two poor, simple-minded,
weather-beaten, devout French peasants.  It is nightfall; the bell
called the "Angelus" rings out from the church steeple, and the two
poor souls, resting for a moment from their labours, devote a few
seconds to the silent prayers enjoined by their church.  That is all;
and yet in that one picture the sorrows, the toils, and the
consolations of the needy French peasantry are summed up in a single
glimpse of a pair of working and praying partners.

Millet died somewhat suddenly in 1875.  Strong and hearty as he was,
even the sturdy health of the Norman peasant had been undermined by the
long hardships of his early struggles, and his constitution gave way at
last with comparative rapidity.  Still, he had lived long enough to see
his fame established, to enjoy ten years of ease and honour, and to
find his work cordially admired by all those for whose admiration he
could have cared to make an effort.  After his death, the pictures and
unfinished sketches in his studio were sold for 321,000 francs, a
little less than 13,000 pounds.  The peasant boy of Greville had at
last conquered all the difficulties which obstructed his path, and had
fought his own way to fame and dignity.  And in so fighting, he had
steadily resisted the temptation to pander to the low and coarse taste
in art of the men by whom he was surrounded.  In spite of cold, and
hunger, and poverty, he had gone on trying to put upon his canvas the
purer, truer, and higher ideas with which his own beautiful soul was
profoundly animated.  In that endeavour he nobly succeeded.  While too
many contemporary French pictures are vicious and sensual in tone and
feeling, every one of Millet's pictures is a sermon in colour--a thing
to make us sympathize more deeply with our kind, and to send us away,
saddened perhaps, yet ennobled and purified.




VI.

JAMES GARFIELD, CANAL BOY.


At the present time, the neighbourhood of Cleveland, Ohio, the busiest
town along the southern shore of Lake Erie, may fairly rank as one of
the richest agricultural districts in all America.  But when Abram
Garfield settled down in the township of Orange in 1830, it was one of
the wildest and most unpeopled woodland regions in the whole of the
United States.  Pioneers from the older states had only just begun to
make little clearings for themselves in the unbroken forest; and land
was still so cheap that Abram Garfield was able to buy himself a tract
of fifty acres for no more than 20 pounds.  His brother-in-law's family
removed there with him; and the whole strength of the two households
was immediately employed in building a rough log hut for their common
accommodation, where both the Garfields and the Boyntons lived together
during the early days of their occupation.  The hut consisted of a mere
square box, made by piling logs on top of one another, the spaces
between being filled with mud, while the roof was formed of loose stone
slabs. Huts of that sort are everywhere common among the isolation of
the American backwoods; and isolated indeed they were, for the
Garfields' nearest neighbours, when they first set up house, lived as
far as seven miles away, across the uncleared forest.

When Abram Garfield came to this lonely lodge in the primaeval
woodlands, he had one son and one daughter.  In 1831, the year after
his removal to his new home, a second boy was born into the family,
whom his father named James Abram.  Before the baby was eighteen months
old, the father died, and was buried alone, after the only possible
fashion among such solitary settlers, in a corner of the wheat field
which he himself had cleared of its stumps.  A widow's life is always a
hard one, but in such a country and under such conditions it is even
harder and more lonely than elsewhere. Mrs. Garfield's eldest boy,
Thomas, was only eleven years old; and with the aid of this one
ineffectual helper, she managed herself to carry on the farm for many
years.  Only those who know the hard toil of a raw American township
can have any idea what that really means.  A farmer's work in America
is not like a farmer's work in England.  The man who occupies the soil
is there at once his own landlord and his own labourer; and he has to
contend with nature as nobody in England has had to contend with it for
the last five centuries at least.  He finds the land covered with
trees, which he has first to fell and sell as timber; then he must dig
or burn out the stumps; clear the plot of boulders and large stones;
drain it, fence it, plough it, and harrow it; build barns for the
produce and sheds for the cows; in short, MAKE his farm, instead of
merely TAKING it.  This is labour from which many strong men shrink in
dismay, especially those who have come out fresh from a civilized and
fully occupied land.  For a woman and a boy, it is a task that seems
almost above their utmost powers.  Nevertheless, Mrs. Garfield and her
son did not fail under it.  With her own hands, the mother split up the
young trees info rude triangular rails to make the rough snake fences
of the country--mere zigzags of wood laid one bit above the other;
while the lad worked away bravely at sowing fall and spring wheat,
hoeing Indian corn, and building a little barn for the harvest before
the arrival of the long cold Ohio winter.  To such a family did the
future President originally belong; and with them he must have shared
those strong qualities of perseverance and industry which more than
anything else at length secured his ultimate success in life.

For James Garfield's history differs greatly in one point from that of
most other famous working men, whose stories have been told in this
volume.  There is no reason to believe that he was a man of exceptional
or commanding intellect.  On the contrary, his mental powers appear to
have been of a very respectable but quite ordinary and commonplace
order.  It was not by brilliant genius that James Garfield made his way
up in life; it was rather by hard work, unceasing energy, high
principle, and generous enthusiasm for the cause of others.  Some of
the greatest geniuses among working men, such as Burns, Tannahill, and
Chatterton, though they achieved fame, and though they have enriched
the world with many touching and beautiful works, must be considered to
have missed success in life, so far as their own happiness was
concerned, by their unsteadiness, want of self-control, or lack of
fixed principle. Garfield, on the other hand, was not a genius; but by
his sterling good qualities he nevertheless achieved what cannot but be
regarded as a true success, and left an honourable name behind him in
the history of his country.

However poor an American township may be, it is seldom too poor to
afford its children a moderate and humble education.  While James
Garfield was still very young, the settlers in the neighbourhood
decided to import a schoolmaster, whom they "boarded about" between
them, after a fashion very common in rural western districts.  The
school-house was only a log hut; the master was a lad of twenty; and
the textbooks were of the very meagrest sort.  But at least James
Garfield was thus enabled to read and write, which after all is the
great first step on the road to all possible promotion.  The raw,
uncouth Yankee lad who taught the Ohio boys, slept at Widow Garfield's,
with Thomas and James; and the sons of the neighbouring settlers worked
on the farm during the summer months, but took lessons when the long
ice and snow of winter along the lake shore put a stop almost entirely
for the time to their usual labours.

James continued at school till he was twelve years old, and then, his
brother Thomas (being by that time twenty-one) went away by agreement
still further west to Michigan, leaving young Jim to take his place
upon the little farm.  The fences were all completed, by this time; the
barn was built, the ground was fairly brought under cultivation, and it
required comparatively little labour to keep the land cropped after the
rough fashion which amply satisfies American pioneers, with no rent to
pay, and only their bare living to make out of the soil.  Thomas was
going to fell trees in Michigan, to clear land there for a farmer; and
he proposed to use his earnings (when he got them) for the purpose of
building a "frame house" (that is to say, a house built of planks)
instead of the existing log hut.  It must be added, in fairness, that
hard as were the circumstances under which the young Garfields lived,
they were yet lucky in their situation in a new country, where wages
were high, and where the struggle for life is far less severe or
competitive than in old settled lands like France and England. Thomas,
in fact; would get boarded for nothing in Michigan, and so would be
able easily to save almost all his high wages for the purpose of
building the frame house.

So James had to take to the farm in summer, while in the winter he
began to work as a sort of amateur carpenter in a small way.  As yet he
had lived entirely in the backwoods, and had never seen a town or even
a village; but his education in practical work had begun from his very
babyhood, and he was handy after the usual fashion of American or
colonial boys--ready to turn his hand to anything that happened to
present itself.  In new countries, where everybody has not got
neighbours and workmen within call, such rough-and-ready handiness is
far more common than in old England. The one carpenter of the
neighbourhood asked James to help him, on the proud day when Tom
brought back his earnings from Michigan, and set about the building of
the frame house, for which he had already collected the unhewn timber.
From that first beginning, by the time he was thirteen, James was
promoted to assist in building a barn; and he might have taken
permanently to a carpenter's life, had it not been that his boyish
passion for reading had inspired him with an equal passion for going to
sea.  He had read Marryatt's novels and other sailor tales--what boy
has not?--and he was fired with the usual childish desire to embark
upon that wonderful life of chasing buccaneers, fighting pirates,
capturing prizes, or hunting hidden treasure, which is a lad's
brilliantly coloured fancy picture of an everyday sailor's wet, cold,
cheerless occupation.

At last, when James was about fifteen, his longing for the sea grew so
strong that his mother, by way of a compromise, allowed him to go and
try his luck with the Lake Erie captains at Cleveland. Shipping on the
great lakes, where one can see neither bank from the middle of the wide
blue sheet of water, and where wrecks are unhappily as painfully
frequent as on our own coasts, was quite sufficiently like going to sea
to suit the adventurous young backwoodsman to the top of his bent.  But
when he got to Cleveland, a fortunate disappointment awaited him.  The
Cleveland captains declined his services in such vigorous seafaring
language (not unmixed with many unnecessary oaths), that he was glad
enough to give up the idea of sailoring, and take a place as driver of
a canal boat from Cleveland to Pittsburg in Pennsylvania, the boat
being under the charge of one of his own cousins.  Copper ore was then
largely mined on Lake Superior, where it is very abundant, carried by
ship to Cleveland, down the chain of lakes, and there transferred to
canal boats, which took it on to Pittsburg, the centre of a great coal
and manufacturing district in Pennsylvania, to be smelted and employed
in various local arts.  Young Garfield stuck for a little while to the
canal business.  He plodded along wearily upon the bank, driving his
still wearier horse before him, and carrying ore down to Pittsburg with
such grace as he best might; but it didn't somehow quite come up to his
fancy picture of the seaman's life.  It was dull and monotonous, and he
didn't care for it much.  In genuine American language, "he didn't find
it up to sample."  The sea might be very well in its way; but a canal
was a very different matter indeed.  So after a fair trial, James
finally gave the business up, and returned to his mother on the little
homestead, ill and tired with his long tramping.

While he was at home, the schoolmaster of the place, who saw that the
lad had abilities, was never tired of urging him to go to school, and
do himself justice by getting himself a first-rate education, or at
least as good a one as could be obtained in America.  James was ready
enough to take this advice, if the means were forthcoming; but how was
he to do so?  "Oh, that's easy enough," said young Bates, the master.
"You'll only have to work out of hours as a carpenter, take odd jobs in
your vacations, live plainly, and there you are."  In England there are
few schools where such a plan would be practicable; but in
rough-and-ready America, where self-help is no disgrace, there are
many, and they are all well attended.  In the neighbouring town of
Chester, a petty Baptist sect had started a young school which they
named Geauga Seminary (there are no plain schools in America--they are
all "academies" or "institutes"); and to this simple place young
Garfield went, to learn and work as best he might for his own
advancement.  A very strange figure he must then have cut, indeed; for
a person who saw him at the time described him as wearing a pair of
trousers he had long outworn, rough cow-hide boots, a waistcoat much
too short for him, and a thread-bare coat, with sleeves that only
reached a little below the elbows.  Of such stuff as that, with a stout
heart and an eager brain, the budding presidents of the United States
are sometimes made.

James soon found himself humble lodgings at an old woman's in Chester,
and he also found himself a stray place at a carpenter's shop in the
town, where he was able to do three hours' work out of school time
every day, besides giving up the whole of his Saturday holiday to
regular labour.  It was hard work, this schooling and carpentering side
by side; but James throve upon it; and at the end of the first term he
was not only able to pay all his bill for board and lodging, but also
to carry home a few dollars in his pocket by way of savings.

James stopped three years at the "seminary" at Chester; and in the
holidays he employed himself by teaching in the little township schools
among the country districts.  There is generally an opening for young
students to earn a little at such times by instructing younger boys
than themselves in reading, writing, and arithmetic; and the
surrounding farmers, who want schooling for their boys, are glad enough
to take the master in on the "boarding round" system, for the sake of
his usefulness in overlooking the lads in the preparation of their home
lessons.  It is a simple patriarchal life, very different from anything
we know in England; and though Ohio was by this time a far more settled
and populated place than when Abram Garfield first went there, it was
still quite possible to manage in this extremely primitive and family
fashion.  The fact is, though luxuries were comparatively unknown, food
was cheap and abundant; and a young teacher who was willing to put his
heart into his work could easily earn more than enough to live upon in
rough comfort.  Sometimes the school-house was a mere log hut, like
that in which young Garfield had been born; but, at any rate, it was
work to do, and food to eat, and that alone was a great thing for a lad
who meant to make his own way in the world by his own exertions.

Near the end of his third year at Chester, James met, quite
accidentally, with a young man who had come from a little embryo
"college," of the sort so common in rising American towns, at a place
called Hiram in Ohio.  American schools are almost as remarkable as
American towns for the oddity and ugliness of their names; and this
"college" was known by the queer and meaningless title of the "Eclectic
Institute."  It was conducted by an obscure sect who dub themselves
"The Disciples' Church," to which young Garfield's father and mother
had both belonged.  His casual acquaintance urged upon him strongly the
desirability of attending the institute; and James, who had already
begun to learn Latin, and wished to learn more, was easily persuaded to
try this particular school rather than any other.

In August, 1851, James Garfield, then aged nearly twenty, presented
himself at the "Eclectic Institute," in the farm-labourer's clothes
which were his only existing raiment.  He asked to see the "president"
of the school, and told him plainly that he wished to come there for
education, but that he was poor, and if he came, he must work for his
living.  "What can you do?" asked the president. "Sweep the floors,
light the fires, ring the bell, and make myself generally useful,"
answered the young backwoodsman.  The president, pleased with his
eagerness, promised to try him for a fortnight; and at the end of the
fortnight, Garfield had earned his teaching so well that he was excused
from all further fees during the remainder of his stay at the little
institute.  His post was by no mean an easy one, for he was
servant-of-all-work as well as student; but he cared very little for
that as long as he could gain the means for self-improvement.

Hiram was a small town, as ugly as its name.  Twelve miles from a
railway, a mere agricultural centre, of the rough back-country sort,
all brand new and dreary looking, with a couple of wooden churches,
half a dozen wooden shops, two new intersecting streets with wooden
sidewalks, and that was all.  The "institute" was a square brick block,
planted incongruously in the middle of an Indian-corn plantation; and
the students were the sons and daughters of the surrounding farmers,
for (as in most western schools) both sexes were here educated
together.  But the place suited Garfield far better than an older and
more dignified university would have done.  The other students knew no
more than he did, so that he did not feel himself at a disadvantage;
they were dressed almost as plainly as himself; and during the time he
was at Hiram he worked away with a will at Latin, Greek, and the higher
mathematics, so as to qualify himself for a better place hereafter.
Meanwhile, the local carpenter gave him plenty of planing to do, with
which he managed to pay his way; and as he had to rise before five
every morning to ring the first bell, he was under no danger of
oversleeping himself.  By 1853, he had made so much progress in his
studies that he was admitted as a sort of pupil teacher, giving
instruction himself in the English department and in rudimentary Greek
and Latin, while he went on with his own studies with the aid of the
other teachers.

James had now learnt as much as the little "Eclectic Institute" could
possibly teach him, and he began to think of going to some better
college in the older-settled and more cultivated eastern states, where
he might get an education somewhat higher than was afforded him by the
raw "seminaries" and "academies" of his native Ohio.  True, his own
sect, the "Disciples' Church," had got up a petty university of their
own, "Bethany College"--such self-styled colleges swarm all over the
United States; but James didn't much care for the idea of going to it.
"I was brought up among the Disciples," he said; "I have mixed chiefly
among them; I know little of other people; it will enlarge my views and
give me more liberal feelings if a try a college elsewhere, conducted
otherwise; if I see a little of the rest of the world."  Moreover,
those were stirring times in the States.  The slavery question was
beginning to come uppermost.  The men of the free states in the north
and west were beginning to say among themselves that they would no
longer tolerate that terrible blot upon American freedom--the
enslavement of four million negroes in the cotton-growing south. James
Garfield felt all his soul stirred within him by this great national
problem--the greatest that any modern nation has ever had to solve for
itself.  Now, his own sect, the Disciples, and their college, Bethany,
were strongly tinctured with a leaning in favour of slavery, which
young James Garfield utterly detested.  So he made up his mind to
having nothing to do with the accursed thing, but to go east to some
New England college, where he would mix among men of culture, and where
he would probably find more congenial feelings on the slavery question.

Before deciding, he wrote to three eastern colleges, amongst others to
Yale, the only American university which by its buildings and
surroundings can lay any claim to compare, even at a long distance, in
beauty and associations, with the least among European universities.
The three colleges gave him nearly similar answers; but one of them, in
addition to the formal statement of terms and so forth, added the short
kindly sentence, "If you come here, we shall be glad to do what we can
for you."  It was only a small polite phrase; but it took the heart of
the rough western boy. If other things were about the same, he said, he
would go to the college which offered him, as it were, a friendly grasp
of the hand.  He had saved a little money at Hiram; and he proposed now
to go on working for his living, as he had hitherto done, side by side
with his regular studies.  But his brother, who was always kind and
thoughtful to him, would not hear of this.  Thomas had prospered
meanwhile in his own small way, and he insisted upon lending James such
a sum as would cover his necessary expenses for two years at an eastern
university.  James insured his life for the amount, so that Thomas
might not be a loser by his brotherly generosity in case of his death
before repayment could be made; and then, with the money safe in his
pocket, he started off for his chosen goal, the Williams College, in
one of the most beautiful and hilly parts of Massachusetts.

During the three years that Garfield was at this place, he studied hard
and regularly, so much so that at one time his brain showed symptoms of
giving way under the constant strain.  In the vacations, he took a trip
into Vermont, a romantic mountain state, where he opened a writing
school at a little country village; and another into the New York
State, where he engaged himself in a similar way at a small town on the
banks of the lovely Hudson river.  At college, in spite of his rough
western dress and manners, he earned for himself the reputation of a
thoroughly good fellow.  Indeed, geniality and warmth of manner,
qualities always much prized by the social American people, were very
marked traits throughout of Garfield's character, and no doubt helped
him greatly in after life in, rising to the high summit which he
finally reached.  It was here, too, that he first openly identified
himself with the anti-slavery party, which was then engaged in fighting
out the important question whether any new slave states should be
admitted to the Union.  Charles Sumner, the real grand central figure
of that noble struggle, was at that moment thundering in Congress
against the iniquitous extension of the slave-holding area, and was
employing all his magnificent powers to assail the abominable Fugitive
Slave Bill, for the return of runaway negroes, who escaped north, into
the hands of their angry masters.  The American colleges are always big
debating societies, where questions of politics are regularly argued
out among the students; and Garfield put himself at the head of the
anti-slavery movement at his own little university.  He spoke upon the
subject frequently before the assembled students, and gained himself a
considerable reputation, not only as a zealous advocate of the rights
of the negro, but also as an eloquent orator and a powerful
argumentative debater.

In 1856, Garfield took his degree at Williams College, and had now
finished his formal education.  By that time, he was a fair though not
a great scholar, competently read in the Greek and Latin literatures,
and with a good knowledge of French and German.  He was now nearly
twenty-five years old; and his experience was large and varied enough
to make him already into a man of the world.  He had been farmer,
carpenter, canal driver, and student; he had seen the primitive life of
the forest, and the more civilized society of the Atlantic shore; he
had taught in schools in many states; he had supported himself for
years by his own labours; and now, at an age when many young men are,
as a rule, only just beginning life on their own account, he had
practically raised himself from his own class into the class of
educated and cultivated gentlemen.  As soon as he had taken his degree,
his old friends, the trustees of the "Eclectic Institute" at Hiram,
proud of their former sweeper and bell-ringer, called him back at a
good salary as teacher of Greek and Latin.  It was then just ten years
since he had toiled wearily along the tow-path of the Ohio and
Pennsylvania Canal.

As a teacher, Garfield seems to have been eminently successful. His
genial character and good-natured way of explaining things made him a
favourite at once with the rough western lads he had to teach, who
would perhaps have thought a more formal teacher stiff and stuckup.
Garfield was one of themselves; he knew their ways and their manners;
he could make allowances for their awkwardness and bluntness of speech;
he could adopt towards them the exact tone which put them at home at
once with their easy-going instructor. Certainly, he inspired all his
pupils with an immense love and devotion for him; and it is less easy
to inspire those feelings in a sturdy Ohio farmer than in most other
varieties of the essentially affectionate human species.

From 1857 to 1861, Garfield remained at Hiram, teaching and working
very hard.  His salary, though a good one for the time and place, was
still humble according to our English notions; but it sufficed for his
needs; and as yet it would have seemed hardly credible that in only
twenty years the Ohio schoolmaster would rise to be President of the
United States.  Indeed, it is only in America, that country of
peculiarly unencumbered political action, where every kind of talent is
most rapidly recognized and utilized, that this particular form of
swift promotion is really possible.  But while Garfield was still at
his Institute, he was taking a vigorous part in local politics,
especially on the slavery question. Whenever there was a political
meeting at Hiram, the young schoolmaster was always called upon to take
the anti-slavery side; and he delivered himself so effectively upon
this favourite topic that he began to be looked upon as a rising
political character. In America, politics are less confined to any one
class than in Europe; and there would be nothing unusual in the
selection of a schoolmaster who could talk to a seat in the local or
general legislature.  The practice of paying members makes it possible
for comparatively poor men to offer themselves as candidates; and
politics are thus a career, in the sense of a livelihood, far more than
in any other country.

In 1858, Garfield married a lady who had been a fellow-student of his
in earlier days, and to whom he had been long engaged.  In the
succeeding year, he got an invitation which greatly pleased and
flattered him.  The authorities at Williams College asked him to
deliver the "Master's Oration" at their annual festival; an unusual
compliment to pay to so young a man, and one who had so recently taken
his degree.  It was the first opportunity he had ever had for a
pleasure-trip, and taking his young wife with him (proud indeed, we may
be sure, at this earliest honour of his life, the precursor of so many
more) he went to Massachusetts by a somewhat roundabout but very
picturesque route, down the Great Lakes, through the Thousand Islands,
over the St. Lawrence rapids, and on to Quebec, the only town in
America which from its old-world look can lay claim to the sort of
beauty which so many ancient European cities abundantly possess.  He
delivered his address with much applause, and returned to his Ohio home
well satisfied with this pleasant outing.

Immediately on his return, the speech-making schoolmaster was met by a
very sudden and unexpected request that he would allow himself to be
nominated for the State legislature.  Every state of the Union has its
own separate little legislative body, consisting of two houses; and it
was to the upper of these, the Senate of Ohio, that James Garfield was
asked to become a candidate.  The schoolmaster consented; and as those
were times of very great excitement, when the South was threatening to
secede if a President hostile to the slave-owning interest was elected,
the contest was fought out almost entirely along those particular
lines.  Garfield was returned as senator by a large majority, and took
his seat in the Ohio Senate in January, 1860.  There, his voice was
always raised against slavery, and he was recognized at once as one of
the ablest speakers in the whole legislature.

In 1861, the great storm burst over the States.  In the preceding
November, Abraham Lincoln had been elected President.  Lincoln was
himself, like Garfield, a self-made man, who had risen from the very
same pioneer labourer class;--a wood-cutter and rail-splitter in the
backwoods of Illinois, he had become a common boatman on the
Mississippi, and had there improved his mind by reading eagerly in all
his spare moments.  With one of those rapid rises so commonly made by
self-taught lads in America, he had pushed his way into the Illinois
legislature by the time he was twenty-five, and qualified himself to
practise as a barrister at Springfield.  His shrewd original talents
had raised him with wonderful quickness into the front ranks of his own
party; and when the question between the North and South rose into the
region of practical politics, Lincoln was selected by the republicans
(the antislavery group) as their candidate for the Presidency of the
United States.  This selection was a very significant one in several
ways; Lincoln was a very strong opponent of slavery, and his
candidature showed the southern slave-owners that if the Republicans
were successful in the contest, a vigorous move against the
slave-holding oligarchy would at once be made.  But it was also
significant in the fact that Lincoln was a western man; it was a sign
that the farmers and grangers of the agricultural west were beginning
to wake up politically and throw themselves into the full current of
American State affairs.  On both these grounds, Lincoln's nomination
must have been deeply interesting to Garfield, whose own life had been
so closely similar, and who was destined, twenty years later, to follow
him to the same goal.

Lincoln was duly elected, and the southern states began to secede. The
firing upon Fort Sumter by the South Carolina secessionists was the
first blow struck in that terrible war.  Every man who was privileged
to live in America at that time (like the present writer) cannot recall
without a glow of recollection the memory of the wild eagerness with
which the North answered that note of defiance, and went forth with
overpowering faith and eagerness to fight the good fight on behalf of
human freedom.  Such a spontaneous outburst of the enthusiasm of
humanity has never been known, before or since.  President Lincoln
immediately called for a supply of seventy-five thousand men.  In the
Ohio Senate, his message was read amid tumultuous applause; and the
moment the sound of the cheers died away, Garfield, as natural
spokesman of the republican party, sprang to his feet, and moved in a
short and impassioned speech that the state of Ohio should contribute
twenty thousand men and three million dollars as its share in the
general preparations.  The motion was immediately carried with the
wildest demonstrations of fervour, and Ohio, with all the rest of the
North, rose like one man to put down by the strong hand the hideous
traffic in human flesh and blood.

During those fiery and feverish days, every citizen of the loyal states
felt himself to be, in reserve at least, a possible soldier. It was
necessary to raise, drill, and render effective in an incredibly short
time a large army; and it would have been impossible to do so had it
not been for the eager enthusiasm with which civilians of every sort
enlisted, and threw themselves into their military duties with almost
incredible devotion.  Garfield felt that he must bear his own part in
the struggle by fighting it out, not in the Senate but on the field;
and his first move was to obtain a large quantity of arms from the
arsenal in the doubtfully loyal state of Missouri.  In this mission he
was completely successful; and he was next employed to raise and
organize two new regiments of Ohio infantry.  Garfield, of course, knew
absolutely nothing of military matters at that time; but it was not a
moment to stand upon questions of precedence or experience; the born
organizers came naturally to the front, and Garfield was one of them.
Indeed, the faculty for organization seems innate in the American
people, so that when it became necessary to raise and equip so large a
body of men at a few weeks' notice, the task was undertaken offhand by
lawyers, doctors, shopkeepers, and schoolmasters, without a minute's
hesitation, and was performed on the whole with distinguished success.

When Garfield had organized his regiments, the Governor asked him to
accept the post of colonel to one of them.  But Garfield at first
mistrusted his own powers in this direction.  How should he, who had
hitherto been poring chiefly over the odes of Horace (his favourite
poet), now take so suddenly to leading a thousand men into actual
battle?  He would accept only a subordinate position, he said, if a
regular officer of the United States army, trained at the great
military academy at West Point, was placed in command. So the Governor
told him to go among his own farmer friends in his native district, and
recruit a third regiment, promising to find him a West Point man as
colonel, if one was available.  Garfield accepted the post of
lieutenant-colonel, raised the 42nd Ohio regiment, chiefly among his
own old pupils at Hiram, and set off for the seat of operations.  At
the last moment the Governor failed to find a regular officer to lead
these raw recruits, every available man being already occupied, and
Garfield found himself, against his will, compelled to undertake the
responsible task of commanding the regiment.  He accepted the task thus
thrust upon him, and as if by magic transformed himself at once from a
schoolmaster into an able soldier.

In less than one month, Colonel Garfield took his raw troops into
action in the battle of Middle Creek, and drove the Confederate General
Marshall, with far larger numbers, out of his intrenchments, compelling
him to retreat into Virginia.  This timely victory did much to secure
the northern advance along the line of the Mississippi.  During the
whole of the succeeding campaign Garfield handled his regiment with
such native skill and marked success that the Government appointed him
Brigadier-General for his bravery and military talent.  In spite of all
his early disadvantages, he had been the youngest member of the Ohio
Senate, and now he was the youngest general in the whole American army.

Shortly after, the important victory of Chickamauga was gained almost
entirely by the energy and sagacity of General Garfield. For this
service, he was raised one degree in dignity, receiving his commission
as Major-General.  He served altogether only two years and three months
in the army.

But while Garfield was at the head of his victorious troops in
Kentucky, his friends in Ohio were arranging, without his consent or
knowledge, to call him away to a very different sphere of work. They
nominated Garfield as their candidate for the United States House of
Representatives at Washington.  The General himself was unwilling to
accede to their request, when it reached him.  He thought he could
serve the country better in the field than in Congress.  Besides, he
was still a comparatively poor man.  His salary as Major-General was
double that of a member of the House; and for his wife's and children's
sake he hesitated to accept the lesser position.  Had he continued in
the army to the end of the war, he would doubtless have risen to the
very highest honours of that stirring epoch.  But President Lincoln was
very anxious that Garfield should come into the Congress, where his
presence would greatly strengthen the President's hands; and with a
generous self-denial which well bespeaks his thorough loyalty, Garfield
gave up his military post and accepted a place in the House of
Representatives.  He took his seat in December, 1863.

For seventeen years, General Garfield sat in the general legislature of
the United States as one of the members for Ohio. During all that time,
he distinguished himself most honourably as the fearless advocate of
honest government, and the pronounced enemy of those underhand dodges
and wire-pulling machinery which are too often the disgrace of American
politics.  He was opposed to all corruption and chicanery, especially
to the bad system of rewarding political supporters with places under
Government, which has long been the chief blot upon American republican
institutions. As a person of stalwart honesty and singleness of
purpose, he made himself respected by both sides alike.  Politically
speaking, different men will judge very differently of Garfield's acts
in the House of Representatives.  Englishmen especially cannot fail to
remark that his attitude towards ourselves was almost always one of
latent hostility; but it is impossible for anybody to deny that his
conduct was uniformly guided by high principle, and a constant
deference to what he regarded as the right course of action.

In 1880, when General Garfield had already risen to be the acknowledged
leader of the House of Representatives, his Ohio supporters put him in
nomination for the upper chamber, the Senate. They wished Garfield to
come down to the state capital and canvas for support; but this the
General would not hear of.  "I never asked for any place yet," he said,
"except the post of bell-ringer and general sweeper at the Hiram
Institute, and I won't ask for one now."  But at least, his friends
urged, he would be on the spot to encourage and confer with his
partisans.  No, Garfield answered; if they wished to elect him they
must elect him in his absence; he would avoid all appearance, even, of
angling for office.  The result was that all the other candidates
withdrew, and Garfield was elected by acclamation.

After the election he went down to Ohio and delivered a speech to his
constituents, a part of which strikingly illustrates the courage and
independence of the backwoods schoolmaster.  "During the twenty years
that I have been in public life," he said, "almost eighteen of it in
the Congress of the United States, I have tried to do one thing.
Whether I was mistaken or otherwise, it has been the plan of my life to
follow my conviction, at whatever personal cost to myself.  I have
represented for many years a district in Congress whose approbation I
greatly desired; but though it may seem, perhaps, a little egotistical
to say it, I yet desired still more the approbation of one person, and
his name was Garfield.  He is the only man that I am compelled to sleep
with, and eat with, and live with, and die with; and if I could not
have his approbation I should have bad companionship."

Only one higher honour could now fall to the lot of a citizen of the
United States.  The presidency was the single post to which Garfield's
ambition could still aspire.  That honour came upon him, like all the
others, without his seeking; and it came, too, quite unexpectedly.
Five months later, in the summer of 1880, the National Republican
Convention met to select a candidate for their party at the forthcoming
presidential election.  Every four years, before the election, each
party thus meets to decide upon the man to whom its votes will be given
at the final choice.  After one or two ineffectual attempts to secure
unanimity in favour of other and more prominent politicians, the
Convention with one accord chose James Garfield for its candidate--a
nomination which was quite as great a surprise to Garfield himself as
to all the rest of the world.  He was elected President of the United
States in November, 1880.

It was a marvellous rise for the poor canal boy, the struggling
student, the obscure schoolmaster, thus to find himself placed at the
head of one among the greatest nations of the earth.  He was still less
than fifty, and he might reasonably have looked forward to many years
of a happy, useful, and honourable life.  Nevertheless, it is
impossible to feel that Garfield's death was other than a noble and
enviable one.  He was cut off suddenly in the very moment of his
brightest success, before the cares and disappointments of office had
begun to dim the pleasure of his first unexpected triumph.  He died a
martyr to a good and honest cause, and his death-bed was cheered and
alleviated by the hushed sorrow and sympathy of an entire nation--one
might almost truthfully add, of the whole civilized world.

From the first, President Garfield set his face sternly against the bad
practice of rewarding political adherents by allowing them to nominate
officials in the public service--a species of covert corruption
sanctioned by long usage in the United States.  This honest and
independent conduct raised up for him at once a host of enemies among
his own party.  The talk which they indulged in against the President
produced a deep effect upon a half-crazy and wildly egotistic
French-Canadian of the name of Guiteau, who had emigrated to the States
and become an American citizen.  General Garfield had arranged a trip
to New England in the summer of 1881, to attend the annual festival at
his old school, the Williams College, Massachusetts; and for that
purpose he left the White House (the President's official residence at
Washington) on July 2. As he stood in the station of the Baltimore and
Potomac Railway, arm in arm with Mr. Blaine, the Secretary of State,
Guiteau approached him casually, and, drawing out a pistol, fired two
shots in rapid succession, one of which took effect on the President
above the third rib.  The assassin was at once secured, and the wounded
President was carried back carefully to the White House.

Almost everybody who reads this book will remember the long suspense,
while the President lay stretched upon his bed for weeks and weeks
together, with all Europe and America watching anxiously for any sign
of recovery, and sympathizing deeply with the wounded statesman and his
devoted wife.  Every effort that was possible was made to save him, but
the wound was past all surgical skill.  After lingering long with the
stored-up force of a good constitution, James Garfield passed away at
last of blood-poisoning, more deeply regretted perhaps than any other
man whom the present generation can remember.

It is only in America that precisely such a success as Garfield's is
possible for people who spring, as he did, from the midst of the
people.  In old-settled and wealthy countries we must be content, at
best, with slower and less lofty promotion.  But the lesson of
Garfield's life is not for America only, but for the whole world of
workers everywhere.  The same qualities which procured his success
there will produce a different, but still a solid success, anywhere
else.  As Garfield himself fittingly put it, with his usual keen
American common sense, "There is no more common thought among young
people than the foolish one, that by-and-by something will turn up by
which they will suddenly achieve fame or fortune.  No, young gentlemen;
things don't turn up in this world unless somebody turns them up."




VII.

THOMAS EDWARD, SHOEMAKER.


It is the object of this volume to set forth the lives of working men
who through industry, perseverance, and high principle have raised
themselves by their own exertions from humble beginnings. Raised
themselves!  Yes; but to what?  Not merely, let us hope, to wealth and
position, not merely to worldly respect and high office, but to some
conspicuous field of real usefulness to their fellow men.  Those whose
lives we have hitherto examined did so raise themselves by their own
strenuous energy and self-education. Either, like Garfield and
Franklin, they served the State zealously in peace or war; or else,
like Stephenson and Telford, they improved human life by their
inventions and engineering works; or, again, like Herschel and
Fraunhofer, they added to the wide field of scientific knowledge; or
finally, like Millet and Gibson, they beautified the world with their
noble and inspiring artistic productions.  But in every one of these
cases, the men whose lives we have been here considering did actually
rise, sooner or later, from the class of labourers into some other
class socially and monetarily superior to it.  Though they did great
good in other ways to others, they did still as a matter of fact
succeed themselves in quitting the rank in which they were born, and
rising to some other rank more or less completely above it.

Now, it will be clear to everybody that so long as our present social
arrangements exist, it must be impossible for the vast mass of
labouring men ever to do anything of the sort.  It is to be desired,
indeed, that every labouring man should by industry and thrift secure
independence in the end for himself and his family; but however much
that may be the case, it will still rest certain that the vast mass of
men will necessarily remain workers to the last; and that no attempt to
raise individual working men above their own class into the
professional or mercantile classes can ever greatly benefit the working
masses as a whole.  What is most of all desirable is that the
condition, the aims, and the tastes of working men, as working men,
should be raised and bettered; that without necessarily going outside
their own ranks, they should become more prudent, more thrifty, better
educated, and wider-minded than many of their predecessors have been in
the past. Under such circumstances, it is surely well to set before
ourselves some examples of working men who, while still remaining
members of their own class, have in the truest and best sense "raised
themselves" so as to attain the respect and admiration of others
whether their equals or superiors in the artificial scale.  Dr. Smiles,
who has done much to illustrate the history of the picked men among the
labouring orders, has chosen two or three lives of such a sort for
investigation, and from them we may select a single one as an example
of a working man's career rendered conspicuous by qualities other than
those that usually secure external success.

Thomas Edward, associate of the Linnean Society, though a Scotchman all
his life long, was accidentally born (so to speak) at Gosport, near
Portsmouth, on Christmas Day, 1814.  His father was in the Fifeshire
militia, and in those warlike days, when almost all the regulars were
on the Continent, fighting Napoleon, militia regiments used to be
ordered about the country from one place to another, to watch the coast
or mount guard over the French prisoners, in the most unaccountable
fashion.  So it happened, oddly enough, that Thomas Edward, a Scotchman
of the Scotch, was born close under the big forts of Portsmouth harbour.

After Waterloo, however, the Fifeshire regiment was sent home again;
and the militia being before long disbanded, John Edward, our hero's
father, went to live at Aberdeen, where he plied his poor trade of a
hand-loom linen weaver for many years.  It was on the green at
Aberdeen, surrounded by small labourers' cottages, that Thomas Edward
passed his early days.  From his babyhood, almost, the boy had a strong
love for all the beasties he saw everywhere around him; a fondness for
birds and animals, and a habit of taming them which can seldom be
acquired, but which seems with some people to come instinctively by
nature.  While Tam was still quite a child, he loved to wander by
himself out into the country, along the green banks of the Dee, or
among the tidal islands at the mouth of the river, overgrown by waving
seaweeds, and fringed with great white bunches of blossoming
scurvy-grass. He loved to hunt for crabs and sea-anemones beside the
ebbing channels, or to watch the jelly-fish left high and dry upon the
shore by the retreating water.  Already, in his simple way, the little
ragged bare-footed Scotch laddie was at heart a born naturalist.

Very soon, Tam was not content with looking at the "venomous beasts,"
as the neighbours called them, but he must needs begin to bring them
home, and set up a small aquarium and zoological garden on his own
account.  All was fish that came to Tam's net: tadpoles, newts, and
stickleback from the ponds, beetles from the dung-heaps, green crabs
from the sea-shore--nay, even in time such larger prizes as hedgehogs,
moles, and nestfuls of birds.  Nothing delighted him so much as to be
out in the fields, hunting for and taming these his natural pets.

Unfortunately, Tam's father and mother did not share the boy's passion
for nature, and instead of encouraging him in pursuing his inborn
taste, they scolded him and punished him bitterly for bringing home the
nasty creatures.  But nothing could win away Tam from the love of the
beasties; and in the end, he had his own way, and lived all his life,
as he himself afterwards beautifully put it, "a fool to nature."  Too
often, unhappily, fathers and mothers thus try to check the best
impulses in their children, under mistaken notions of right, and
especially is this the case in many instances as regards the love of
nature.  Children are constantly chidden for taking an interest in the
beautiful works of creation, and so have their first intelligent
inquiries and aspirations chilled at once; when a little care and
sympathy would get rid of the unpleasantness of having white mice or
lizards crawling about the house, without putting a stop to the young
beginner's longing for more knowledge of the wonderful and beautiful
world in whose midst he lives.

When Tam was nearly five years old, he was sent to school, chiefly no
doubt to get him out of the way; but Scotch schools for the children of
the working classes were in those days very rough hard places, where
the taws or leather strap was still regarded as the chief instrument of
education.  Little Edward was not a child to be restrained by that
particular form of discipline; and after he had had two or three
serious tussles with his instructors, he was at last so cruelly beaten
by one of his masters that he refused to return, and his parents, who
were themselves by no means lacking in old Scotch severity, upheld him
in his determination.  He had picked up reading by this time, and now
for a while he was left alone to hunt about to his heart's content
among his favourite fields and meadows.  But by the time he was six
years old, he felt he ought to be going to work, brave little mortal
that he was; and as his father and mother thought so too, the poor wee
mite was sent to join his elder brother in working at a tobacco factory
in the town, at the wages of fourteen-pence a week.  So, for the next
two years, little Tam waited upon a spinner (as the workers are called)
and began life in earnest as a working man.

At the end of two years, however, the brothers heard that better wages
were being given, a couple of miles away, at Grandholm, up the river
Don.  So off the lads tramped, one fast-day (a recognized Scotch
institution), to ask the manager of the Grandholm factory if he could
give them employment.  They told nobody of their intention, but trudged
away on their own account; and when they came back and told their
parents what they had done, the father was not very well satisfied with
the proposal, because he thought it too far for so small a boy as Tam
to walk every day to and from his work.  Tam, however, was very anxious
to go, not only on account of the increased wages, but also (though
this was a secret) because of the beautiful woods and crags round
Grandholm, through which he hoped to wander during the short dinner
hour.  In the end, John Edward gave way, and the boys were allowed to
follow their own fancy in going to the new factory.

It was very hard work; the hours were from six in the morning till
eight at night, for there was no Factory Act then to guard the interest
of helpless children; so the boys had to be up at four in the morning,
and were seldom home again till nine at night.  In winter, the snow
lies long and deep on those chilly Aberdeenshire roads, and the east
winds from the German Ocean blow cold and cutting up the narrow valley
of the Don; and it was dreary work toiling along them in the dark of
morning or of night in bleak and cheerless December weather.  Still,
Tam liked it on the whole extremely well.  His wages were now three
shillings a week; and then, twice a day in summer, there was the
beautiful walk to and fro along the leafy high-road.  "People may say
of factories what they please," Edward wrote much later, "but I liked
this factory. It was a happy time for me whilst I remained there.  The
woods were easy of access during our meal-hours.  What lots of nests!
What insects, wild flowers, and plants, the like of which I had never
seen before."  The boy revelled in the beauty of the birds and beasts
he saw here, and he retained a delightful recollection of them
throughout his whole after life.

This happy time, however, was not to last for ever.  When young Edward
was eleven years old, his father took him away from Grandholm, and
apprenticed him to a working shoemaker.  The apprenticeship was to go
on for six years; the wages to begin at eighteen-pence a week; and the
hours, too sadly long, to be from six in the morning till nine at
night.  Tam's master, one Charles Begg, was a drunken London workman,
who had wandered gradually north; a good shoemaker, but a quarrelsome,
rowdy fellow, loving nothing on earth so much as a round with his fists
on the slightest provocation.  From this unpromising teacher, Edward
took his first lessons in the useful art of shoemaking; and though he
learned fast--for he was not slothful in business--he would have
learned faster, no doubt, but for his employer's very drunken and
careless ways.  When Begg came home from the public-house, much the
worse for whisky, he would first beat Tam, and then proceed upstairs to
beat his wife.  For three years young Edward lived under this
intolerable tyranny, till he could stand it no longer.  At last, Begg
beat and ill-treated him so terribly that Tam refused outright to
complete his apprenticeship.  Begg was afraid to compel him to do
so--doubtless fearing to expose his ill-usage of the lad.  So Tam went
to a new master, a kindly man, with whom he worked in future far more
happily.

The boy now began to make himself a little botanical garden in the back
yard of his mother's house--a piece of waste ground covered with
rubbish, such as one often sees behind the poorer class of cottages in
towns.  Tam determined to alter all that, so he piled up all the stones
into a small rockery, dug up the plot, manured it, and filled it with
wild and garden flowers.  The wild flowers, of course, he found in the
woods and hedgerows around him; but the cultivated kinds he got in a
very ingenious fashion, by visiting all the rubbish heaps of the
neighbourhood, on which garden refuse was usually piled.  A good many
roots and plants can generally be found in such places, and by digging
them up, Tam was soon able to make himself a number of bright and
lively beds.  Such self-help in natural history always lay very much in
Edward's way.

At the same time, young Edward was now beginning to feel the desire for
knowing something more about the beasts and birds of which he was so
fond.  He used to go in all his spare moments among the shops in the
town, to look at the pictures in the windows, especially the pictures
of animals; and though his earnings were still small, he bought a book
whenever he was able to afford one. In those days, cheap papers for the
people were only just beginning to come into existence; and Tam, who
was now eighteen, bought the first number of the Penny Magazine, an
excellent journal of that time, which he liked so much that he
continued to take in the succeeding numbers.  Some of the papers in it
were about natural history, and these, of course, particularly
delighted the young man's heart.  He also bought the Weekly Visitor,
which he read through over and over again.

In 1831, when Tam was still eighteen, he enlisted in the Aberdeenshire
militia, and during his brief period of service an amusing circumstance
occurred which well displays the almost irresistible character of
Edward's love of nature.  While he was drilling with the awkward squad
one morning, a butterfly of a kind that he had never seen before
happened to flit in front of him as he stood in the ranks.  It was a
beautiful large brown butterfly, and Edward was so fascinated by its
appearance that he entirely forgot, in a moment, where he was and what
he was doing.  Without a second's thought, he darted wildly out of the
ranks, and rushed after the butterfly, cap in hand.  It led him a
pretty chase, over sandhills and shore, for five minutes.  He was just
on the point of catching it at last, when he suddenly felt a heavy hand
laid upon his shoulder, and looking round, he saw the corporal of the
company and several soldiers come to arrest him.  Such a serious
offence against military discipline might have cost him dear indeed,
for corporals have little sympathy with butterfly hunting; but luckily
for Edward, as he was crossing the parade ground under arrest, he
happened to meet an officer walking with some ladies.  The officer
asked the nature of his offence, and when the ladies heard what it was
they were so much interested in such a strange creature as a
butterfly-loving militiaman, that they interceded for him, and finally
begged him off his expected punishment.  The story shows us what sort
of stuff Edward was really made of.  He felt so deep an interest in all
the beautiful living creatures around him for their own sake, that he
could hardly restrain his feelings even under the most untoward
circumstances.

When Edward was twenty, he removed from Aberdeen to Banff where he
worked as a journeyman for a new master.  The hours were very long, but
by taking advantage of the summer evenings, he was still able to hunt
for his beloved birds, caterpillars, and butterflies. Still, the low
wages in the trade discouraged him much, and he almost made up his mind
to save money and emigrate to America.  But one small accident alone
prevented him from carrying out this purpose.  Like a good many other
young men, the naturalist shoemaker fell in love.  Not only so, but his
falling in love took practical shape a little later in his getting
married; and at twenty-three, the lonely butterfly hunter brought back
a suitable young wife to his little home.  The marriage was a very
happy one. Mrs. Edward not only loved her husband deeply, but showed
him sympathy in his favourite pursuits, and knew how to appreciate his
sterling worth.  Long afterwards she said, that though many of her
neighbours could not understand her husband's strange behaviour, she
had always felt how much better it was to have one who spent his spare
time on the study of nature than one who spent it on the public-house.

As soon as Edward got a home of his own, he began to make a regular
collection of all the animals and plants in Banffshire.  This was a
difficult thing for him to do, for he knew little of books, and had
access to very few, so that he couldn't even find out the names of all
the creatures he caught and preserved.  But, though he didn't always
know what they were called, he did know their natures and habits and
all about them; and such first-hand knowledge in natural history is
really the rarest and the most valuable of all.  He saw little of his
fellow-workmen.  They were usually a drunken, careless lot; Edward was
sober and thoughtful, and had other things to think of than those that
they cared to talk about with one another.  But he went out much into
the fields, with invincible determination, having made up his mind that
he would get to know all about the plants and beasties, however much
the knowledge might cost him.

For this object, he bought a rusty old gun for four-and-sixpence, and
invested in a few boxes and bottles for catching insects.  His working
hours were from six in the morning till nine at night, and for that
long day he always worked hard to support his wife, and (when they
came) his children.  He had therefore only the night hours between nine
and six to do all his collecting.  Any other man, almost, would have
given up the attempt as hopeless; but Edward resolved never to waste a
single moment or a single penny, and by care and indomitable energy he
succeeded in making his wished-for collection.  Sometimes he was out
tramping the whole night; sometimes he slept anyhow, under a hedge or
haystack; sometimes he took up temporary quarters in a barn, an
outhouse, or a ruined castle.  But night after night he went on
collecting, whenever he was able; and he watched the habits and manners
of the fox, the badger, the otter, the weasel, the stoat, the pole-cat,
and many other regular night-roamers as no one else, in all
probability, had ever before watched them in the whole world.

Sometimes he suffered terrible disappointments, due directly or
indirectly to his great poverty.  Once, he took all his cases of
insects, containing nine hundred and sixteen specimens, and
representing the work of four years, up to his garret to keep them
there till he was able to glaze them.  When he came to take them down
again he found to his horror that rats had got at the boxes, eaten
almost every insect in the whole collection, and left nothing behind
but the bare pins, with a few scattered legs, wings, and bodies,
sticking amongst them.  Most men would have been so disgusted with this
miserable end to so much labour, that they would have given up moth
hunting for ever.  But Edward was made of different stuff.  He went to
work again as zealously as ever, and in four years more, he had got
most of the beetles, flies, and chafers as carefully collected as
before.

By the year 1845, Edward had gathered together about two thousand
specimens of beasts, birds, and insects found in the neighbourhood of
his own town of Banff.  He made the cases to hold them himself, and did
it so neatly that, in the case of his shells, each kind had even a
separate little compartment all of its own.  And now he unfortunately
began to think of making money by exhibiting his small museum.  If only
he could get a few pounds to help him in buying books, materials,
perhaps even a microscope, to help him in prosecuting his scientific
work, what a magnificent thing that would be for him!  Filled with this
grand idea, he took a room in the Trades Hall at Banff, and exhibited
his collection during a local fair.  A good many people came to see it,
and the Banff paper congratulated the poor shoemaker on his energy in
gathering together such a museum of curiosities "without aid, and under
discouraging circumstances which few would have successfully
encountered."  He was so far lucky in this first venture that he
covered his expenses and was able even to put away a little money for
future needs.  Encouraged by this small triumph, the unwearied
naturalist set to work during the next year, and added several new
attractions to his little show.  At the succeeding fair he again
exhibited, and made still more money out of his speculation. Unhappily,
the petty success thus secured led him to hope he might do even better
by moving his collection to Aberdeen.

To Aberdeen, accordingly, Edward went.  He took a shop in the great gay
thoroughfare of that cold northern city--Union Street--and prepared to
receive the world at large, and to get the money for the longed-for
books and the much-desired microscope.  Now, Aberdeen is a big, busy,
bustling town; it has plenty of amusements and recreations; it has two
colleges and many learned men of its own; and the people did not care
to come and see the working shoemaker's poor small collection.  If he
had been a president of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science, now--some learned knight or baronet come down by special train
from London--the Aberdeen doctors and professors might have rushed to
hear his address; or if he had been a famous music-hall singer or an
imitation negro minstrel, the public at large might have flocked to be
amused and degraded by his parrot-like buffoonery; but as he was only a
working shoemaker from Banff, with a heaven-born instinct for watching
and discovering all the strange beasts and birds of Scotland, and the
ways and thoughts of them, why, of course, respectable Aberdeen, high
or low, would have nothing in particular to say to him.  Day after day
went by, and hardly anybody came, till at last poor Edward's heart sank
terribly within him.  Even the few who did come were loth to believe
that a working shoemaker could ever have gathered together such a large
collection by his own exertions.

"Do you mean to say," said one of the Aberdeen physicians to Edward,
"that you've maintained your wife and family by working at your trade,
all the while that you've been making this collection?"

"Yes, I do," Edward answered.

"Oh, nonsense!" the doctor said.  "How is it possible you could have
done that?"

"By never losing a single minute or part of a minute," was the brave
reply, "that I could by any means improve."

It is wonderful indeed that when once Edward had begun to attract
anybody's attention at all, he and his exhibition should ever have been
allowed to pass so unnoticed in a great, rich, learned city like
Aberdeen.  But it only shows how very hard it is for unassuming merit
to push its way; for the Aberdeen people still went unheeding past the
shop in Union Street, till Edward at last began to fear and tremble as
to how he should ever meet the expenses of the exhibition.  After the
show had been open four weeks, one black Friday came when Edward never
took a penny the whole day.  As he sat there alone and despondent in
the empty room, the postman brought him a letter.  It was from his
master at Banff. "Return immediately," it said, "or you will be
discharged."  What on earth could he do?  He couldn't remove his
collection; he couldn't pay his debt.  A few more days passed, and he
saw no way out of it.  At last, in blank despair, he offered the whole
collection for sale.  A gentleman proposed to pay him the paltry sum of
20 pounds 10s. for the entire lot, the slow accumulations of ten long
years.  It was a miserable and totally inadequate price, but Edward
could get no more.  In the depths of his misery, he accepted it.  The
gentleman took the collection home, gave it to his boy, and finally
allowed it all, for want of care and attention, to go to rack and ruin.
And so that was the end of ten years of poor Thomas Edward's
unremitting original work in natural history.  A sadder tale of
unrequited labour in the cause of science has seldom been written.

How he ever recovered from such a downfall to all his hopes and
expectations is extraordinary.  But the man had a wonderful power of
bearing up against adverse circumstances; and when, after six weeks'
absence, he returned to Banff, ruined and dispirited, he set to work
once more, as best he might, at the old, old trade of shoemaking.  He
was obliged to leave his wife and children in Aberdeen, and to tramp
himself on foot to Banff, so that he might earn the necessary money to
bring them back; for the cash he had got for the collection had all
gone in paying expenses.  It is almost too sad to relate; and no wonder
poor Edward felt crushed indeed when he got back once more to his
lonely shoemaker's bench and fireless fireside.  He was very lonely
until his wife and children came.  But when the carrier generously
brought them back free (with that kindliness which the poor so often
show to the poor), and the home was occupied once more, and the fire
lighted, he felt as if life might still be worth living, at least for
his wife and children.  So he went back to his trade as heartily as he
might, and worked at it well and successfully.  For it is to be noted,
that though Thomas Edward was so assiduous a naturalist and collector,
he was the best hand, too, at making first-class shoes in all Banff.
The good workman is generally the best man at whatever he undertakes.
Certainly the best man is almost always a good workman at his own trade.

But of course he made no more natural history collections?  Not a bit
of it.  Once a naturalist, always a naturalist.  Edward set to work
once more, nothing daunted, and by next spring he was out everywhere
with his gun, exactly as before, replacing the sold collection as fast
as ever his hand was able.

By this time Edward began to make a few good friends.  Several
magistrates for the county signed a paper for him, stating that they
knew him to be a naturalist, and no poacher; and on presenting this
paper to the gamekeepers, he was generally allowed to pursue his
researches wherever he liked, and shoot any birds or animals he needed
for his new museum.  Soon after his return from Aberdeen, too, he made
the acquaintance of a neighbouring Scotch minister, Mr. Smith of
Monquhitter, who proved a very kind and useful friend to him.  Mr.
Smith was a brother naturalist, and he had books--those precious
books--which he lent Edward freely; and there for the first time the
shoemaker zoologist learned the scientific names of many among the
birds and animals with whose lives and habits he had been so long
familiar.  Another thing the good minister did for his shoemaker
friend: he constantly begged him to write to scientific journals the
results of his observations in natural history.  At first Edward was
very timid; he didn't like to appear in print; thought his grammar and
style wouldn't be good enough; fought shy of the proposal altogether.
But at last Edward made up his mind to contribute a few notes to the
Banffshire Journal, and from that he went on slowly to other papers,
until at last he came to be one of the most valued occasional writers
for several of the leading scientific periodicals in England.
Unfortunately, science doesn't pay.  All this work was done for love
only; and Edward's only reward was the pleasure he himself derived from
thus jotting down the facts he had observed about the beautiful
creatures he loved so well.

Soon Mr. Smith induced the indefatigable shoemaker to send a few papers
on the birds and beasts to the Zoologist.  Readers began to perceive
that these contributions were sent by a man of the right sort--a man
who didn't merely read what other men had said about the creatures in
books, but who watched their ways on his own account, and knew all
about their habits and manners in their own homes.  Other friends now
began to interest themselves in him; and Edward obtained at last, what
to a man of his tastes must have been almost as much as money or
position--the society of people who could appreciate him, and could
sympathize in all that interested him.  Mr. Smith in particular always
treated him, says Dr. Smiles, "as one intelligent man treats another."
The paltry distinctions of artificial rank were all forgotten between
them, and the two naturalists talked together with endless interest
about all those lovely creatures that surround us every one on every
side, but that so very few people comparatively have ever eyes to see
or hearts to understand.  It was a very great loss to Edward when Mr.
Smith died, in 1854.

In the year 1858 the untiring shoemaker had gathered his third and last
collection, the finest and best of all.  By this time he had become an
expert stuffer of birds, and a good preserver of fish and flowers.  But
his health was now beginning to fail.  He was forty-four, and he had
used his constitution very severely, going out at nights in cold and
wet, and cheating himself of sleep during the natural hours of rest and
recuperation.  Happily, during all these years, he had resisted the
advice of his Scotch labouring friends, to take out whisky with him on
his nightly excursions.  He never took a drop of it, at home or abroad.
If he had done so, he himself believed, he could not have stood the
cold, the damp, and the exposure in the way he did.  His food was
chiefly oatmeal-cake; his drink was water.  "Sometimes, when I could
afford it," he says, "my wife boiled an egg or two, and these were my
only luxuries." He had a large family, and the task of providing for
them was quite enough for his slender means, without leaving much
margin for beer or whisky.

But the best constitution won't stand privation and exposure for ever.
By-and-by Edward fell ill, and had a fever.  He was ill for a month,
and when he came round again the doctor told him that he must at once
give up his nightly wandering.  This was a real and serious blow to
poor Edward; it was asking him to give up his one real pleasure and
interest in life.  All the happiest moments he had ever known were
those which he had spent in the woods and fields, or among the lonely
mountains with the falcons, and the herons, and the pine-martens, and
the ermines.  All this delightful life he was now told he must abandon
for ever.  Nor was that all. Illness costs money.  While a man is
earning nothing, he is running up a doctor's bill.  Edward now saw that
he must at last fall back upon his savings bank, as he rightly called
it--his loved and cherished collection of Banffshire animals.  He had
to draw upon it heavily.  Forty cases of birds were sold; and Edward
now knew that he would never be able to replace the specimens he had
parted with.

Still, his endless patience wasn't yet exhausted.  No more of wandering
by night, to be sure, upon moor or fell, gun in hand, chasing the
merlin or the polecat to its hidden lair; no more of long watching
after the snowy owl or the long-tailed titmouse among the frozen winter
woods; but there remained one almost untried field on which Edward
could expend his remaining energy, and in which he was to do better
work for science than in all the rest--the sea.

This new field he began to cultivate in a novel and ingenious way. He
got together all the old broken pails, pots, pans, and kettles he could
find in the neighbourhood, filled them with straw or bits of rag, and
then sank them with a heavy stone into the rocky pools that abound
along that weather-beaten coast.  A rope was tied to one end, by which
he could raise them again; and once a month he used to go his rounds to
visit these very primitive but effectual sea-traps.  Lots of living
things had meanwhile congregated in the safe nests thus provided for
them, and Edward sorted them all over, taking home with him all the
newer or more valuable specimens.  In this way he was enabled to make
several additions to our knowledge of the living things that inhabit
the sea off the north-east coast of Scotland.

The fishermen also helped him not a little, by giving him many rare
kinds of fish or refuse from their nets, which he duly examined and
classified.  As a rule, the hardy men who go on the smacks have a
profound contempt for natural history, and will not be tempted, even by
offers of money, to assist those whom they consider as half-daft
gentlefolk in what seems to them a perfectly useless and almost
childish amusement.  But it was different with Tam Edward, the strange
shoemaker whom they all knew so well; if HE wanted fish or rubbish for
his neat collection in the home-made glass cases, why, of course he
could have them, and welcome.  So they brought him rare sand-suckers,
and blue-striped wrasse, and saury pike, and gigantic cuttle-fish, four
feet long, to his heart's content. Edward's daughters were now also old
enough to help him in his scientific studies.  They used to watch for
the clearing of the nets, and pick out of the refuse whatever they
thought would interest or please their father.  But the fish themselves
were Edward's greatest helpers and assistants.  As Dr. Smiles quaintly
puts it, they were the best of all possible dredgers.  His daughters
used to secure him as many stomachs as possible, and from their
contents he picked out an immense number of beautiful and valuable
specimens.  The bill of fare of the cod alone comprised an incredible
variety of small crabs, shells, shrimps, sea-mice, star-fish,
jelly-fish, sea anemones, eggs, and zoophytes.  All these went to swell
Edward's new collection of marine animals.

To identify and name so many small and little-known creatures was a
very difficult task for the poor shoemaker, with so few books, and no
opportunities for visiting museums and learned societies.  But his
industry and ingenuity managed to surmount all obstacles. Naturalists
everywhere are very willing to aid and instruct one another; especially
are the highest authorities almost always eager to give every help and
encouragement in their power to local amateurs.  Edward used to wait
till he had collected a batch of specimens of a single class or order,
and then he would send them by post to learned men in different parts
of the country, who named them for him, and sent them back with some
information as to their proper place in the classification of the group
to which they belonged.  Mr. Spence Bate of Plymouth is the greatest
living authority on crustaceans, such as the lobsters, shrimps,
sea-fleas, and hermit crabs; and to him Edward sent all the queer
crawling things of that description that he found in his original
sea-traps. Mr. Couch, of Polperro in Cornwall, was equally versed in
the true backboned fishes; and to him Edward sent any doubtful midges,
or gurnards, or gobies, or whiffs.  So numerous are the animals and
plants of the sea-shore, even in the north of Scotland alone, that if
one were to make a complete list of all Edward's finds it would occupy
an entire book almost as large as this volume.

Naturalists now began to help Edward in another way, the way that he
most needed, by kind presents of books, especially their own
writings--a kind of gift which cost them nothing, but was worth to him
a very great deal.  Mr. Newman, the editor of the Zoologist paper, was
one of his most useful correspondents, and gave him several excellent
books on natural history.  Mr. Bate made him a still more coveted
present--a microscope, with which he could examine several minute
animals, too small to be looked at by the naked eye.  The same good
friend also gave him a little pocket-lens (or magnifying glass) for use
on the sea-shore.

As Edward went on, his knowledge increased rapidly, and his discoveries
fully kept pace with it.  The wretchedly paid Banff shoemaker was now
corresponding familiarly with half the most eminent men of science in
the kingdom, and was a valued contributor to all the most important
scientific journals.  Several new animals which he had discovered were
named in his honour, and frequent references were made to him in
printed works of the first importance.  It occurred to Mr. Couch and
Mr. Bate, therefore, both of whom were greatly indebted to the
working-man naturalist for specimens and information, that Edward ought
to be elected a member of some leading scientific society.  There is no
such body of greater distinction in the world of science than the
Linnean Society; and of this learned institution Edward was duly
elected an associate in 1866.  The honour was one which he had richly
deserved, and which no doubt he fully appreciated.

And yet he was nothing more even now than a working shoemaker, who was
earning not more but less wages even than he once used to do. He had
brought up a large family honestly and respectably; he had paid his way
without running into debt; his children were all growing up; and he had
acquired a wide reputation among naturalists as a thoroughly
trustworthy observer and an original worker in many different fields of
botany and zoology.  But his wages were now only eight shillings a
week, and his science had brought him, as many people would say, only
the barren honour of being an associate of the Linnean Society, or the
respected friend of many among the noblest and greatest men of his
country.  He began life as a shoemaker, and he remained a shoemaker to
the end.  "Had I pursued money," he said, "with half the ardour and
perseverance that I have pursued nature, I have no hesitation in saying
that by this time I should have been a rich man."

In 1876, Dr. Smiles, the historian of so many truly great working men,
attracted by Edward's remarkable and self-sacrificing life, determined
to write the good shoemaker's biography while he was still alive.
Edward himself gave Dr. Smiles full particulars as to his early days
and his later struggles; and that information the genial biographer
wove into a delightful book, from which all the facts here related have
been borrowed.  The "Life of a Scotch Naturalist" attracted an immense
deal of attention when it was first published, and led many people,
scientific or otherwise, to feel a deep interest in the man who had
thus made himself poor for the love of nature.  The result was such a
spontaneous expression of generous feeling towards Edward that he was
enabled to pass the evening of his days not only in honour, but also in
substantial ease and comfort.

And shall we call such a life as this a failure?  Shall we speak of it
carelessly as unsuccessful?  Surely not.  Edward had lived his life
happily, usefully, and nobly; he had attained the end he set before
himself; he had conquered all his difficulties by his indomitable
resolution; and he lived to see his just reward in the respect and
admiration of all those whose good opinion was worth the having.  If he
had toiled and moiled all the best days of his life, at some work,
perhaps, which did not even benefit in any way his fellow-men; if he
had given up all his time to enriching himself anyhow, by fair means or
foul; if he had gathered up a great business by crushing out
competition and absorbing to himself the honest livelihood of a dozen
other men; if he had speculated in stocks and shares, and piled up at
last a vast fortune by doubtful transactions, all the world would have
said, in its unthinking fashion, that Mr. Edward was a wonderfully
successful man.  But success in life does not consist in that only, if
in that at all. Edward lived for an aim, and that aim he amply
attained.  He never neglected his home duties or his regular work; but
in his stray moments he found time to amass an amount of knowledge
which rendered him the intellectual equal of men whose opportunities
and education had been far more fortunate than his own.  The pleasure
he found in his work was the real reward that science gave him. All his
life long he had that pleasure: he saw the fields grow green in spring,
the birds build nests in early summer, the insects flit before his eyes
on autumn evenings, the stoat and hare put on their snow-white coat to
his delight in winter weather.  And shall we say that the riches he
thus beheld spread ever before him were any less real or less
satisfying to a soul like his than the mere worldly wealth that other
men labour and strive for?  Oh no. Thomas Edward was one of those who
work for higher and better ends than outward show, and verily he had
his reward.  The monument raised up to that simple and earnest working
shoemaker in the "Life of a Scotch Naturalist" is one of which any
scientific worker in the whole world might well be proud.  In his old
age, he had the meed of public encouragement and public recognition,
the one thing that the world at large can add to a scientific worker's
happiness; and his name will be long remembered hereafter, when those
of more pretentious but less useful labourers are altogether forgotten.
How many men whom the world calls successful might gladly have




